                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
           
verbal bullyingmaking threatsstealing****                                                                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
NATIONAL CRIME VICTIMIZATION SURVEY:SCHOOL CRIME SUPPLEMENT, 1995                           
                                                      
•••
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                           Principal Investigator                               
                                                                                
                    United States Department of Justice                         
                        Bureau of Justice Statistics                            
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                             First ICPSR Edition                                
                                 April 1998                                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                       Inter-university Consortium for                          
                        Political and Social Research                           
                                P.O. Box 1248                                   
                          Ann Arbor, Michigan 48106                             
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                               
                                                                                
                                                                               
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                             BIBLIOGRAPHIC CITATION                             
                                                                                
                                                                                
            Publications  based  on  ICPSR  data  collections  should           
            acknowledge  those  sources  by  means  of  bibliographic           
            citations.  To ensure that such source  attributions  are           
            captured  for  social  science  bibliographic  utilities,           
            citations must appear in footnotes or  in  the  reference           
            section  of publications.  The bibliographic citation for           
            this data collection is:                                            
                                                                                
                                                                                
                 U.S.  Dept.  of  Justice,  Bureau  of   Justice                
                 Statistics.    NATIONAL   CRIME   VICTIMIZATION                
                 SURVEY: SCHOOL CRIME SUPPLEMENT, 1995 [Computer                
                 file].   Conducted  by  U.S. Dept. of Commerce,                
                 Bureau of the Census. ICPSR ed.  Ann Arbor, MI:                
                 Inter-university  Consortium  for Political and                
                 Social  Research  [producer  and  distributor],                
                 1998.                                                          
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                REQUEST FOR INFORMATION ON USE OF ICPSR RESOURCES               
                                                                                
            To provide funding agencies  with  essential  information           
            about  use  of  archival  resources and to facilitate the           
            exchange  of  information   about   ICPSR   participants'           
            research activities, users of ICPSR data are requested to           
            send to ICPSR bibliographic citations for each  completed           
            manuscript or thesis abstract. Please indicate in a cover           
            letter which data were used.                                        
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                 DATA DISCLAIMER                                
                                                                                
            The original  collector  of  the  data,  ICPSR,  and  the           
            relevant  funding  agency bear no responsibility for uses           
            of this collection or for interpretations  or  inferences           
            based upon such uses.                                               
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                               
                                                                                
                                                                               
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                         DATA COLLECTION DESCRIPTION                            
                                                                                
                                                                                
     United States Department of Justice. Bureau of Justice Statistics          
          NATIONAL CRIME VICTIMIZATION SURVEY: SCHOOL CRIME  SUPPLEMENT,        
     1995 (ICPSR 6739)                                                          
                                                                                
     SUMMARY:  This  supplement  to  the  National  Crime  Victimization        
     Surveys  (formerly  the  National  Crime  Surveys)  was designed to        
     collect data on  crime  victimization  in  schools  in  the  United        
     States.  Student  respondents  were  asked a series of questions to        
     determine their school attendance in the  last  six  months.  Other        
     questions  concerning schools were posed, including type of school,        
     distance from home, and general attendance and monitoring policies.        
     The  data  present  information  on  the  response of the school to        
     student violation of rules, accessibility of drugs, and violence in        
     school,  including  types  of  violence and student reaction. Other        
     variables cover general violent crimes,  personal  larceny  crimes,        
     and household crimes and offer information on date, time, and place        
     of crime. Demographic characteristics of household members such  as        
     age,  sex,  race,  education, employment, median family income, and        
     marital status are provided.                                               
                                                                                
     UNIVERSE: All persons in the United States  12  years  of  age  and        
     older.                                                                     
                                                                                
     SAMPLING: Stratified multistage cluster sample of  households  with        
     children  between the ages of 12-19, who had attended school at any        
     time during the six months prior to the month of the interview, and        
     who  were  enrolled  in a school that would advance them toward the        
     eventual receipt of a high school diploma.                                 
                                                                                
     NOTE: The codebook and data collection instrument are provided as a        
     Portable  Document  Format  (PDF)  file.  The  PDF  file format was        
     developed by Adobe Systems Incorporated and can be  accessed  using        
     PDF  reader software, such as the Adobe Acrobat Reader. Information        
     on how to obtain a copy of the Acrobat Reader is  provided  through        
     the ICPSR Website on the Internet.                                         
                                                                                
     EXTENT OF COLLECTION: 1 data file + machine-readable  documentation        
     (PDF)  +  SAS  data  definition  statements  + SPSS data definition        
     statements                                                                 
                                                                                
     EXTENT   OF   PROCESSING:   CONCHK.PR/   DDEF.ICPSR/   MDATA.ICPSR/        
     REFORM.DATA/ REFORM.DOC/ UNDOCCHK.PR/ UNDOCCHK.ICPSR                       
                                                                                
     DATA  FORMAT:  Logical  Record  Length  with  SAS  and  SPSS   data        
     definition statements                                                      
                                                                                
                                                                                
     File Structure: rectangular                                                
     Cases: 15,785                                                              
     Variables: 321                                                             
     Record Length: 483                                                         
     Records Per Case: 1                                                        
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                               
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                              TABLE OF CONTENT                                  
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
       I.  Introduction                                                         
                                                                                
	   Chapter 1: Background                        I                              
                                                                                
           Chapter 2: Survey design                    IV                       
                                                                                
           Chapter 3: Interviewing procedures          VI                       
                                                                                
           Chapter 4: Clerical processing procedures VIII                       
                                                                                
           Chapter 5: Computer processing              XI                       
                                                                                
           Table A                                    XVI                       
                                                                                
           Table B                                   XVII                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
       II. Codebook                                                             
                                                                                
           Household Section                            1                       
                                                                                
           Person Section                              27                       
                                                                                
           SCS Section                                 45                       
                                                                                
           NCVS Incident Section                       60                       
                                                                                
           Index of Source Codes                       91                       
                                                                                
                                                                               
                                                                                
                                                                               
                                                                                
                                                                                
             CHAPTER 1: BACKGROUND - INTRODUCTION OF SURVEY                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 The prevalence of crime in our Nation's schools is a growing concern.          
                                                                                
 There has been increased criticism of the public school system's               
                                                                                
 inability to provide quality education for children in the United              
                                                                                
 States.  Violence in schools has been identified as a possible                 
                                                                                
 contributing cause of the decay in education in the United States.  In         
                                                                                
 addition to costs to the victims and their families, crimes at school          
                                                                                
 disrupt education and may have longer lasting effects on society than          
                                                                                
 crimes committed elsewhere.  Any consideration of a response to crime          
                                                                                
 at school must begin with an accurate, national accounting of the              
                                                                                
 nature and extent school crime plays in the system's inability to              
                                                                                
 provide an adequate education.  The attitudes of juveniles towards             
                                                                                
 crime in the school and its subsequent affect on their behavior needed         
                                                                                
 to be analyzed as well, before recommendations can be made on ways to          
                                                                                
 reduce school victimizations and to assess the effect crime has on the         
                                                                                
 quality of education.                                                          
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 Previous studies on school crime have shown that these crimes are              
                                                                                
 underreported to the police and that victims between the ages of 12            
                                                                                
 and 19 are not as likely as older victims to report victimizations to          
                                                                                
 the police.  Therefore, police statistics on school crime are not              
                                                                                
 adequate to address the issue of the nature and prevalence of school           
                                                                                
 crime.                                                                         
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 The Census Bureau conducts an ongoing survey called the National Crime         
                                                                                
 Victimization Survey (NCVS) for the Bureau of Justice Statistics               
                                                                                
 (BJS).  This survey is a major source of statistical information about         
                                                                                
 the nature and extent of crime throughout the United States.                   
                                                                                
 Periodically, along with the regular NCVS information, additional              
                                                                                
 information relating to crime is obtained using a supplemental survey          
                                                                                
 questionnaire.  Since the NCVS collects limited information on crimes          
                                                                                
 occurring at school, the School Crime Supplement (SCS) was proposed            
                                                                                
 and administered as a supplement to the regular NCVS data collection           
                                                                                
 program.  Since the survey was a supplement to the NCVS, which is              
                                                                                
 sponsored by the BJS, the SCS was conducted under the authority of             
                                                                                
 title 42, United States Code, section 3732.  Strict confidentiality of         
                                                                                
 individual respondent information is guaranteed by the BJS under title         
                                                                                
 42, United States Code, sections 3735 and 3789g, and by the Census             
                                                                                
 Bureau under title 13, United States Code, section 9.  Only Census             
                                                                                
 Bureau employees sworn to preserve this confidentiality may see the            
                                                                                
 completed questionnaires.                                                      
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 The purpose of the School Crime Supplement was to ask additional               
                                                                                
 questions on preventive measures employed by the school, students'             
                                                                                
 participation in after school activities, transportation to and from           
                                                                                
 school, students' perception of rules and equality in school, the              
                                                                                
 presence of weapons and street gangs in school, availability of drugs          
                                                                                
 and alcohol in the school, and attitudinal questions relating to the           
                                                                                
 fear of victimization in school.                                               
                                                                               
                                      II                         ICPSR  6739    
                                                                                
                                                                                
 The School Crime Supplement was conducted for a six month period               
                                                                                
 beginning in January 1995 and extending through June 1995 in all NCVS          
                                                                                
 sample households.  Within these households, the eligible respondents          
                                                                                
 for the SCS were those household members who were between the ages             
                                                                                
 of 12 and 19, had attended school at any time during the 6 months              
                                                                                
 preceding the interview, and were enrolled in a school which would             
                                                                                
 advance them towards the eventual receipt of a high school diploma.            
                                                                                
 These persons were administered the supplemental questions only after          
                                                                                
 their entire NCVS interview was completed.  TABLE A provides the               
                                                                                
 response rate for the School Crime Supplement.                                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 Since NCVS uses both Computer Assisted Telephone Interviewing (CATI)           
                                                                                
 and paper and pencil methods, the supplement did as well.  Thirty              
                                                                                
 percent of the NCVS households are interviewed using CATI while the            
                                                                                
 remaining sample are interviewed using paper and pencil methods.               
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 The same rotation scheme employed for the NCVS survey design was used          
                                                                                
 for the SCS.  The sample of households is divided into groups or               
                                                                                
 rotations.  One rotation group enters the sample every 6 months and            
                                                                                
 the corresponding rotation group from a previous sample is phased out.         
                                                                                
 A rotation scheme is used in order to reduce the burden on the                 
                                                                                
 respondents that could result if they were permanently in sample.              
                                                                                
 Households in sample for the first time are in the incoming rotation.          
                                                                                
 These households are interviewed in person.  That is, a Census Bureau          
                                                                                
 interviewer actually goes to the sample address and conducts the               
                                                                                
 interview.  Households in sample for their second through seventh              
                                                                                
 interview are in the continuing rotations.  These households are               
                                                                                
 interviewed either by local telephone by the same interviewer who              
                                                                                
 conducted the first personal interview or by an CATI interviewer who           
                                                                                
 is calling from a centralized telephone facility.  The exception are           
                                                                                
 households in sample for their fifth NCVS interview.  These households         
                                                                                
 are interviewed in person to reestablish personal contact with the             
                                                                                
 household.                                                                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 The School Crime Supplement is the second of its kind conducted by the         
                                                                                
 Census Bureau.  During the first half of 1989 a similar supplement was         
                                                                                
 conducted.  This first survey was sponsored by the Bureau of the               
                                                                                
 Justice Statistics and the National Institute of Justice (NIJ), both           
                                                                                
 of which are part of the U. S. Department of Justice.  The results for         
                                                                                
 this survey indicated that approximately 9 percent of students, ages           
                                                                                
 12 to 19, were crime victims in or around their school over a 6-month          
                                                                                
 period.  Fifteen percent of the students said their school had gangs,          
                                                                                
 and 16 percent claimed that a student had attacked or threatened a             
                                                                                
 teacher at their school.                                                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 The current SCS survey was sponsored by the National Center for                
                                                                                
 Education Statistics (NCES).  It was an effort to further assemble             
                                                                                
 critical information about school-related victimizations on a national         
                                                                                
 level so that policy makers as well as academic researchers,                   
                                                                                
 practitioners at the Federal, state, and local levels, and special             
                                                                                
 interest groups who are concerned with crime in schools can make               
                                                                                
 informed decisions concerning this issue.                                      
                                                                                
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                       III                                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                               
                                      IV                         ICPSR  6739    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                    CHAPTER 2: SURVEY DESIGN                                    
                                                                                
                                                                                
 Sample Size                                                                    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 The target population for the SCS was defined to be all persons in the         
                                                                                
 NCVS sample who were between the ages of 12 and 19, had attended               
                                                                                
 school at any time during the six months prior to the month of                 
                                                                                
 interview, and who were enrolled in a school which would advance them          
                                                                                
 towards the eventual receipt of a high school diploma.                         
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 To determine the approximate sample size for the School Crime                  
                                                                                
 Supplement prior to it being fielded, unweighted tallies of the number         
                                                                                
 of persons (interviewed and noninterviewed) aged 12 to 19 who were in          
                                                                                
 sample during quarters 3 and 4 1994 were produced.  These quarters             
                                                                                
 were selected for the special tallies because the majority of persons          
                                                                                
 in these quarters would also be in sample during quarters 1 and 2 1995.        
                                                                                
 Based upon these tallies, the Bureau of Census estimated a sample size         
                                                                                
 of approximately 17,000 persons between the ages of 12 and 19.                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 Questionnaire Development                                                      
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 The Bureau of Justice Statistics, the National Center for Education            
                                                                                
 Statistics, and the Census Bureau jointly designed the survey                  
                                                                                
 questionnaire.  The Census Bureau developed the CATI version of the            
                                                                                
 supplement.  Since most of the questions used in the previous survey           
                                                                                
 were incorporated in the current supplement, only minimal testing of           
                                                                                
 the questionnaire was conducted.  The Census Bureau contracted with            
                                                                                
 the Bureau of Labor Statistics to conduct focus group sessions and             
                                                                                
 one-on-one interviews with students from local high schools in the             
                                                                                
 Washington, D.C. Metropolitan area.                                            
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 Based upon the results of the testing, some minor modifications were           
                                                                                
 made to the questionnaire.  The final questionnaire consisted of six           
                                                                                
 different sections.  They included:                                            
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 * Screen Questions - The first section contained the screen questions          
                                                                                
   which were asked to determine if the respondent was eligible for the         
                                                                                
   supplement.                                                                  
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 * Environmental Questions - The second section contained the                   
                                                                                
   environmental questions which obtained selected information on the           
                                                                                
   type of school, such as whether the school was private or public,            
                                                                                
   grades taught, measures taken by the school to ensure the safety of          
                                                                                
   students, and the availability of drugs in school.                           
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 * Victimization - The third section contained the victimization                
                                                                                
   questions which identified or distinguished the nature and extent of         
                                                                                
   the crimes.  These questions were designed to elicit crimes that             
                                                                                
   occurred only at school, that is, in the school building, on the             
                                                                                
   school grounds, or on a school bus.                                          
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                       V                                         
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 * Avoidance - The fourth section contained avoidance questions which           
                                                                                
   identified the effect of fear of school crime on behavior.  The              
                                                                                
   avoidance questions were designed to determine if students stayed away       
                                                                                
   from school or particular places at school for fear of being attacked        
                                                                                
   or harmed.  Students were also asked if they avoided participating in        
                                                                                
   extra-curricular activities at their school for fear that someone            
                                                                                
   might attack or harm them.                                                   
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 * Weapons - The fifth section asked questions pertaining to weapons.           
                                                                                
   The purpose of these questions was to determine if students brought          
                                                                                
   weapons to school for protection.                                            
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 * Gangs - The sixth section contained questions relating to the presence       
                                                                                
   of organized gangs at school and whether students came into contact          
                                                                                
   with gangs or gang members at school.                                        
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 Length of Interview                                                            
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 Each interview on average took 0.167 hours or 10 minutes to complete.          
                                                                                
 Total respondent burden was approximately 2,839 hours.                         
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                               
                                      VI                         ICPSR  6739    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                  CHAPTER 3 - INTERVIEWING PROCEDURES                           
                                                                                
                                                                                
 Eligibility                                                                    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 The only eligible respondents for the School Crime Supplement were             
                                                                                
 NCVS household members between the ages of 12 and 19 who had attended          
                                                                                
 school, elementary through high school, at any time during the six             
                                                                                
 months prior to the interview and who were enrolled in a school which          
                                                                                
 would advance them towards the eventual receipt of a high school               
                                                                                
 diploma.  Persons who had dropped out of school; who had been expelled         
                                                                                
 or suspended from school; or who were temporarily absent from school           
                                                                                
 for any other reason, such as illness or vacation, were eligible for           
                                                                                
 the survey as long as they were attending school at any time during            
                                                                                
 the six months prior to the month of interview.  Persons attending             
                                                                                
 home school were also eligible but were only asked the screening               
                                                                                
 questions since it was deemed that the other questions in the                  
                                                                                
 supplement were not relevant to students attending home schools.               
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 School, for SCS purposes, was defined as any institution designed to           
                                                                                
 advance a person towards a high school diploma.  This included graded          
                                                                                
 public or private elementary schools, middle schools, high schools,            
                                                                                
 home schools, Church schools, and vocational or trade schools that led         
                                                                                
 to a high school diploma.  Not included were persons attending                 
                                                                                
 colleges or universities (except in cases where a high school student          
                                                                                
 was taking an upper level course before a high school diploma was              
                                                                                
 obtained); persons seeking their GED; persons attending night school,          
                                                                                
 including vocational night school; and persons attending vocational,           
                                                                                
 trade, business, correspondence, or other specialized schools that are         
                                                                                
 not associated with academics such as beauty schools and mechanic              
                                                                                
 schools.                                                                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
 Proxy Interview                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 The same rules applied to the School Crime Supplement as they do for           
                                                                                
 the National Crime Victimization Survey with regards to proxy                  
                                                                                
 interviews.  Proxy interviews are interviews conducted in which one            
                                                                                
 household member answers the questions for another person in the               
                                                                                
 household.  For the SCS, household members between the ages of 12 and          
                                                                                
 19 should have been interviewed by self-response whenever possible.            
                                                                                
 However, if the interview was a proxy during the NCVS, a proxy                 
                                                                                
 interview was accepted for the SCS.                                            
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 Information was obtained about an individual household member by               
                                                                                
 conducting a proxy interview only under the following circumstances:           
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 * If a child was 12 or 13 years old, a self-response interview should          
                                                                                
   have been obtained.  If the parents refused to let the interviewer           
                                                                                
   speak to the 12 or 13 year old, a proxy interview was conducted with         
                                                                                
   the parent.                                                                  
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 * If a household member between the ages of 12 and 19 was temporarily          
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                       VII                                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
   absent and not expected to return to the sample household at all             
                                                                                
   during the entire interview period, a proxy interview was                    
                                                                                
   acceptable.                                                                  
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 * If a household member was considered physically or mentally unable to        
                                                                                
   answer the questions, the person must have been unable to be                 
                                                                                
   interviewed due to health problems or mental incompetence.  This             
                                                                                
   condition must have been continuous during the entire interview period       
                                                                                
   and did not include colds or flu, drunkenness, drug use, or problems         
                                                                                
   that might have been aggravated because the questions were upsetting.        
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 Noninterviews                                                                  
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 A noninterview was acceptable for the SCS if the person was an NCVS            
                                                                                
 noninterview; if the respondent was an NCVS interview but refused or           
                                                                                
 was unavailable for the SCS interview; if the respondent was                   
                                                                                
 physically or mentally unable to answer the questions and no proxy was         
                                                                                
 available; or if an acceptable proxy respondent refused to give a              
                                                                                
 proxy SCS interview.  Interviewers were instructed to complete                 
                                                                                
 selected items on the SCS questionnaire for each type of noninterview.         
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 General Interviewing Sequence                                                  
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 The general interview sequence for the SCS was to ask all appropriate          
                                                                                
 NCVS questions of one household member and if eligible for the SCS,            
                                                                                
 ask all appropriate SCS questions before proceeding to the next                
                                                                                
 household member.                                                              
                                                                                
                                                                               
                                      VIII                       ICPSR  6739    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                 CHAPTER 4 - CLERICAL PROCESSING PROCEDURES                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 Once data collection was complete, the SCS data went through clerical          
                                                                                
 review and computer edits to ensure quality data.  The purpose of              
                                                                                
 clerical processing is to prepare the data for computer processing.            
                                                                                
 The clerical processing of the SCS data consisted of two major                 
                                                                                
 operations, the clerical edit and the keying of the data to magnetic           
                                                                                
 tape, which is also performed on the NCVS data.  The SCS data were             
                                                                                
 edited and keyed separately from the NCVS data.                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 Clerical Edits                                                                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 The main purpose of the SCS clerical edit was to locate and correct            
                                                                                
 any interviewer errors and, when possible, correct areas of respondent         
                                                                                
 misunderstanding.  Such errors could only be identified by clerical            
                                                                                
 review of the data.  Errors were corrected in an effort to improve the         
                                                                                
 accuracy and quality of the data.                                              
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 a. Questionnaire Check-in                                                      
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
    The first step of the clerical edit was the manual check-in of the          
                                                                                
    paper questionnaires.  The check-in is a control function which             
                                                                                
    ensures that all shipments are received from each Census Bureau             
                                                                                
    regional office and that each shipment is complete.  Twelve Census          
                                                                                
    Bureau regional offices are located throughout the United States.           
                                                                                
    Each office is responsible for the data collection activities of a          
                                                                                
    survey for a specific, well-defined area or territory.  Data                
                                                                                
    collection problems are often referred to the appropriate regional          
                                                                                
    office for resolution.                                                      
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
    The sample number/control number check was also performed to ensure         
                                                                                
    that it was complete and within an acceptable range.  The next step         
                                                                                
    required a manual verification of any supplements that were marked as       
                                                                                
    noninterviews.  Once these two functions were complete, the SCS forms       
                                                                                
    were separated from the NCVS questionnaires.  In addition, SCS              
                                                                                
    interviews and noninterviews were separated and sorted into batches         
                                                                                
    consisting of approximately 50 supplements each.                            
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 b. Clerical Editing and Coding                                                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
    The second step in the clerical edit was to examine the data for            
                                                                                
    certain types of errors.  Each page of the questionnaire was examined       
                                                                                
    for those interviews conducted using paper and pencil methods.              
                                                                                
    Special computer printouts (protocols) were also examined, clerically       
                                                                                
    edited, and coded for each SCS interview conducted using CATI.  Some        
                                                                                
    of the edits performed are described below.  For CATI, many of these        
                                                                                
    edits were built-into the CATI instrument and the data errors were          
                                                                                
    corrected at the time the data were collected.  For both paper and          
                                                                                
    CATI, the editing and coding operations were 100 percent verified.          
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
    * Numeric values should have been entered right justified.  If the          
                                                                                
      values were not right justified, they were deleted and entered in the     
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                       IX                                        
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
      right-most boxes.                                                         
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
    * If the numeric value was written in alphas, the word(s) were deleted      
                                                                                
      and the appropriate number was entered.  For example, if in item 8        
                                                                                
      there was an entry of "seventh" or 7th, this entry would be deleted       
                                                                                
      and "07" entered, right justified, in the appropriate boxes.              
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
    * In some cases a range might have been entered.  If this was the case,     
                                                                                
      the midpoint was calculated and the range was deleted, replacing it       
                                                                                
      with the midpoint.                                                        
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
    * Write-in entries in "Other-specify" categories were examined to           
                                                                                
      determine if they could be reclassified into one of the precoded          
                                                                                
      categories.                                                               
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
    * If the interviewer made a notation that the respondent answered "Don't    
                                                                                
      know," this category was marked, if one was provided.  If no such         
                                                                                
      category was provided, the note was deleted and the item left blank.      
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
    * If multiple entries were marked where only a single entry was             
                                                                                
      acceptable, the lowest coded (first marked) box was accepted.             
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 c. Special School Coding                                                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
   In addition, some other edits were performed to assign the state,            
                                                                                
   county, and school codes to entries in items 6a and 6b of the SCS.           
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 Data Keying                                                                    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 Upon completion of the clerical edit, coding, and verification, the            
                                                                                
 questionnaires were transmitted to the Electronic Data Processing unit         
                                                                                
 in Jeffersonville, Indiana for data keying.  The questionnaire data            
                                                                                
 were keyed on a key-to-disk device.  For control and quality control           
                                                                                
 purposes, work units of approximately 50 questionnaires each were              
                                                                                
 keyed.  Questionnaires with different sample designations (J16, J17,           
                                                                                
 and J19) were batched separately from each other and within each               
                                                                                
 sample, interviews were batched separately from noninterviews.  The            
                                                                                
 two-digit sample designation code preceded by a "J" is the code                
                                                                                
 assigned to the sample unit when it was selected for the NCVS sample.          
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 All SCS data were keyed using a fixed field format.  For the NCVS, the         
                                                                                
 data is usually keyed in a Source Code/Data format with each data              
                                                                                
 field consisting of a three-digit source code and six digits of data.          
                                                                                
 The data then goes through a conversion during computer processing to          
                                                                                
 put it into a fixed field format.  By keying the SCS data in a fixed           
                                                                                
 field format, which is more difficult for the data keyers since every          
                                                                                
 item in the questionnaire has to be keyed even if it does not contain          
                                                                                
 an entry, a step was saved in later processing to reformat the data to         
                                                                                
 a fixed location on the file.                                                  
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 Because the data were keyed in a fixed field format, various field             
                                                                                
 edits were performed on the data as it was being keyed to ensure that          
                                                                               
                                      X                          ICPSR  6739    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 the record was keyed correctly.  A quality control measure was                 
                                                                                
 employed to ensure an acceptable level of quality of keying.  All              
                                                                                
 keying was verified on a 100 percent basis.  Upon completion of keying         
                                                                                
 and verification, the data for each work unit were read to tape and            
                                                                                
 transmitted to Census Bureau Headquarters in Washington, D.C. for              
                                                                                
 computer processing.                                                           
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 For CATI, corrections to the protocols were keyed and transmitted to           
                                                                                
 Census Bureau Headquarters.  The corrections in the CATI correction            
                                                                                
 file were applied to the original CATI answer file prior to computer           
                                                                                
 processing.                                                                    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                       XI                                        
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                  CHAPTER 5 - COMPUTER PROCESSING                               
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 Following the clerical processing and data keying of the data, the             
                                                                                
 computer processing was initiated.                                             
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 Merging Paper and CATI Data Files                                              
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 One of the first steps in the computer processing operation was the            
                                                                                
 merging of the SCS CATI answer files with the keyed questionnaire              
                                                                                
 file.  Prior to merging the two files, the CATI file was reformatted           
                                                                                
 to the format of the questionnaire file.                                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 NCVS/SCS Matching Operation                                                    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 The next step of computer processing was the matching of the fully             
                                                                                
 edited, unweighted NCVS data files for quarters 1 and 2 1995 to the            
                                                                                
 unedited, unweighted SCS quarterly data files.  Only NCVS households           
                                                                                
 with household members aged 12-19 were matched to the SCS file.                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 The purpose of the match was to identify "unmatched records".  These           
                                                                                
 are records in which there was an NCVS household record with no                
                                                                                
 matching SCS record or an SCS record with no matching NCVS record.             
                                                                                
 Separate listings of the NCVS and SCS unmatched households were                
                                                                                
 produced and the mismatches were clerically reviewed for resolution by         
                                                                                
 Census Bureau staff.  If an NCVS household matched to an SCS                   
                                                                                
 household, a subsequent match was conducted on person line number and          
                                                                                
 age for each person within the household.  Person line number and age          
                                                                                
 mismatches were also clerically reviewed for resolution.  In the               
                                                                                
 majority of the person mismatched cases, the line number and the age           
                                                                                
 discrepancies were corrected to agree with the NCVS.  In some cases,           
                                                                                
 the ages on the NCVS file, those that had been allocated during the            
                                                                                
 regular editing of the NCVS data, were changed to agree with the ages          
                                                                                
 on the SCS file.  For these persons, the ages on the SCS file were             
                                                                                
 considered correct.  In addition, eligible persons on the NCVS file            
                                                                                
 for which no SCS was administered were added to the SCS file as an SCS         
                                                                                
 noninterview.  SCS records which did not match to an NCVS record were          
                                                                                
 eventually dropped from the file.  TABLE B provides a count of the             
                                                                                
 number of SCS records received, the number that matched to an NCVS             
                                                                                
 household/person, and the number of SCS records that were deleted.             
                                                                                
 After the match operation, the NCVS and SCS files were merged and the          
                                                                                
 computer processing of the SCS data was initiated.                             
                                                                                
                                                                                
 Computer Processing of SCS                                                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 a.   Range Check Edit                                                          
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
   The range check edit performed a check on every SCS data item to             
                                                                                
   determine if the values were within the ranges specified in the data         
                                                                                
   items.  If the value for an item failed the check, (the item was not         
                                                                               
                                      XII                        ICPSR  6739    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
   within the specified valid range of entries), the value of the data          
                                                                                
   item was set to an out-of-range response code.  This code consisted of       
                                                                                
   an "8" in the right-most position of the data field preceded by the          
                                                                                
   appropriate number of 9s to fill the field for that source code.  For        
                                                                                
   example, if item 2 was blank or contained an entry of 11, a                  
                                                                                
   out-of-range code of "98" was entered.                                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 b. SCS Consistency Edit                                                        
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
   The consistency edit examined the responses of individual SCS items          
                                                                                
   and then determined if the responses were 1) consistent with the other       
                                                                                
   SCS data items and 2) followed a logical, reasonable response pattern.       
                                                                                
   If a case passed the consistency tests, it passed through the edit           
                                                                                
   unchanged.  If there were inconsistent answers present, then these           
                                                                                
   answers were changed or deleted based upon other entries.                    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
   In addition, the consistency edit created SCS noninterview records           
                                                                                
   for missing, eligible SCS persons.                                           
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 c. Blanking Edit                                                               
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
   After the consistency edit, the data passed through a blanking edit.         
                                                                                
   This edit checked to make sure that the case followed the appropriate        
                                                                                
   skip pattern by stepping sequentially through the items.  It deleted         
                                                                                
   entries that should not have been filled.  An "out-of-universe" code         
                                                                                
   was assigned to all items that failed the edit.  The "out-of-universe"       
                                                                                
   code assigned to items that should have been blank consist of a "9" in       
                                                                                
   each position of the multiple field for that item.  For example, item        
                                                                                
   2 should be blank when the response in item 1 is "no".  On the data          
                                                                                
   file, the value in item 2 would be "99".                                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 d. Weighting Process                                                           
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
   After all editing was completed, the weighting process began.                
                                                                                
   Modifications to the regular NCVS weighting program was necessary in         
                                                                                
   order for the weighting of the SCS file.  The NCVS data had to be            
                                                                                
   weighted twice: once including continuing rotations only and once            
                                                                                
   including all rotations (incoming and continuing rotations).  Modified       
                                                                                
   weighting procedures were necessary because of the following                 
                                                                                
   differences between SCS and NCVS:                                            
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
   *  The eligible population for SCS differs from the eligible                 
                                                                                
      population for NCVS.                                                      
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
   *  A person can respond to the NCVS and not the SCS.                         
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
   *  For select SCS items, the incoming rotation contributes to the            
                                                                                
      estimates as well as continuing rotations.  For the NCVS, only            
                                                                                
      continuing rotations contribute to the estimates.  Households in the      
                                                                                
      incoming rotation (first time interviews) are not included since the      
                                                                                
      data for these cases are "unbounded".  The purpose of the initial         
                                                                                
      interview is for purposes of bounding, that is, to learn about all        
                                                                                
      crimes occurring previously in order to keep the respondent from          
                                                                                
      reporting them in subsequent interviews.  Data obtained in the initial    
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                       XIII                                      
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
      interview are, therefore, not used for computing NCVS victimization       
                                                                                
      estimates; however, we wanted to include supplemental data from all       
                                                                                
      rotations.                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 In the NCVS weighting process, adjustments were made to account for            
                                                                                
 both household and person noninterviews.  Additional adjustment                
                                                                                
 factors were applied to reduce the variance of the estimate by                 
                                                                                
 correcting for differences between the distribution of the sample by           
                                                                                
 age, race, and sex and the distribution of the population by these             
                                                                                
 characteristics.  This also reduced the bias due to undercoverage of           
                                                                                
 various portions of the population.  Weights were assigned to all              
                                                                                
 interviewed households on the file and, within the household, to all           
                                                                                
 interviewed persons.                                                           
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 A special weighting adjustment was performed on the SCS data.                  
                                                                                
 Noninterview adjustment factors were computed to adjust the weighting          
                                                                                
 for SCS noninterviews.  Two SCS person weights were computed as a              
                                                                                
 result of applying special adjustment factors to the NCVS final person         
                                                                                
 weight.                                                                        
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 * The first SCS weight computed was derived using the final NCVS person        
                                                                                
   weight that was calculated for all interviewed persons in interviewed        
                                                                                
   continuing households and applying a within-SCS noninterview                 
                                                                                
   adjustment factor.  This weight, which should be used if producing           
                                                                                
   estimates using only the continuing rotations, is located in the NCVS        
                                                                                
   section of the NCVS/SCS person record.                                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 * The second SCS weight was derived using the final NCVS person weight         
                                                                                
   that was calculated for all interviewed persons in interviewed               
                                                                                
   continuing and incoming households with a within-SCS noninterview            
                                                                                
   adjustment factor applied.  This weight, which should be used if             
                                                                                
   producing estimates using all rotations, is located in the SCS section       
                                                                                
   of the NCVS/SCS person record.                                               
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                               
                                      XIV                        ICPSR  6739    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 File Creation                                                                  
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 Once all computer processing and weighting was completed, a six-month          
                                                                                
 NCVS/SCS flat, fixed length file was created.  The NCVS/SCS flat file          
                                                                                
 is a fixed-field continuous file consisting of only                            
                                                                                
 incoming/continuing interviewed NCVS households with persons aged              
                                                                                
 12-19.  This file is an extract of the final, edited and weighted              
                                                                                
 "complete" NCVS/SCS variable length file.  The "complete" NCVS/SCS             
                                                                                
 file contains data for 1) all NCVS households (interviewed and                 
                                                                                
 noninterviewed, incoming (unbounded) and continuing rotations), 2) all         
                                                                                
 persons (interviewed and noninterviewed) within these households, and          
                                                                                
 3) all incidents reported.  The file structure consists of four unique         
                                                                                
 record types.  These are:                                                      
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 *  Record type 001 which is the address record and consists of limited         
                                                                                
    information about the household.                                            
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 *  Record type 002 contains the entire NCVS household record.                  
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 *  Record type 003 contains the entire NCVS person record which was            
                                                                                
    expanded to include the School Crime information.  A blank SCS record       
                                                                                
    was created for all persons in these household regardless of the            
                                                                                
    respondent's age.  There can be multiple record type 003s depending on      
                                                                                
    the number of persons within a household.                                   
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 *  Record type 004 contains the entire incident record.  There can be          
                                                                                
    multiple record type 004s depending on the number of incidents              
                                                                                
    reported within a household.                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 The flat file includes only those NCVS households with persons aged 12         
                                                                                
 to 19.  It includes the matched NCVS/SCS households with persons aged          
                                                                                
 12-19 as well as the unmatched NCVS households with persons aged 12-19         
                                                                                
 for which no SCS was received.  In addition, the flat file contains            
                                                                                
 only data for those persons in these specified households who are              
                                                                                
 between the ages of 12 to 19.  The file does not include any SCS               
                                                                                
 records that did not match to an NCVS household or person.  Unlike the         
                                                                                
 variable length file, only one record is created for each eligible SCS         
                                                                                
 person.  This record consists of the entire NCVS household record, the         
                                                                                
 entire NCVS person record of only the SCS person, the School crime             
                                                                                
 information, and selected variables from the NCVS incident record,             
                                                                                
 namely the type of crime (TOC) code, whether or not the incident was a         
                                                                                
 series of incidents, if the incident occurred inside or outside the            
                                                                                
 U.S., its time of occurrence and its place of occurrence.                      
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 Prior to its release, the file was reviewed by the Census Bureau's             
                                                                                
 Disclosure Review Board to ensure that the contents of the file did            
                                                                                
 not violate any disclosure avoidance measures.  For confidentiality            
                                                                                
 protection of the public use file, recoding procedures and a control           
                                                                                
 number scrambling routine were performed before the file was released          
                                                                                
 for public use.  In addition, data that may have provided geographic           
                                                                                
 information by inference were blanked because of data confidentiality          
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                       XV                                        
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 reasons.  Although the school attended was uniquely coded, the                 
                                                                                
 Disclosure Review Board mandated that this code be suppressed to avoid         
                                                                                
 individual disclosure.                                                         
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                               
                                      XVI                        ICPSR  6739    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                             TABLE  A                                           
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
             RESPONSE RATE BY TYPE OF SCS INTERVIEW                             
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
    TYPE OF INTERVIEW            COUNT         PERCENT                          
                                                                                
                                                                                
    Interview                   12,235          77.5                            
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
         Personal-self           2,892          18.3                            
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
         Telephone-self          5,413          34.3                            
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
         Personal-proxy            147           0.9                            
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
         Telephone-proxy         3,328          21.1                            
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
         Type of Interview                                                      
                                                                                
         not known                 455           2.9                            
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
    Noninterview                 3,550          22.5                            
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                       XVII                                      
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                 TABLE  B                                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
                               Count    Percent    Action Taken                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 Total NCVS households with                                                     
                                                                                
  eligible persons age 12-19   11,162                                           
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
  Total eligible NCVS                                                           
                                                                                
   persons                     15,785                                           
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 Total number SCS person                                                        
                                                                                
  records received             14,203                                           
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 Total SCS person records                                                       
                                                                                
  that matched to NCVS                                                          
                                                                                
  person age 12-19             14,031       .89     Records retained            
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 Total SCS person records                                                       
                                                                                
  that did not nonmatch to                                                      
                                                                                
  NCVS person age 12-19           172       .01     Records dropped             
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
 Total SCS persons missing                          An SCS noninterview         
                                                                                
  record was created            1,754       .11     record was created          
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                               
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                               
                                                                                
                              HOUSEHOLD SECTION                                 
                              _________________                                 
                                                                                
               SOURCE                                                           
     VAR ITEM  CODE     WORD  DIGIT CHARACTER   ITEM & CODES                    
     ____________________________________________________________               
                                                                                
     V1       Record      1    1-3   1-3       Address ID Record                
              type                                                              
              "001"                                                             
                                                                                
     V2       Sample      1    4     4-5       Sample Number                    
                          2    1                                                
                                                                                
     V3       Scrambled   2    2-4   6-19      Scrambled Control Number         
              Control     3    1-4                                              
              Number      4    1-4              For 1990 sample-all 14 digits   
                          5    1-3                                              
                                                For 1980 sample-first 10 digits 
                                                (last four digits are blank);see
                                                word 6:3-4, characters 23-24    
                                                of the Address ID Record for    
                                                last two digits of the scrambled
                                                control number)                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V4        Household  6    2     20-20      Household Number                
               Number                             1-9                           
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V5        Extra      6   3-4    21-22     Last two digits of scrambled     
               Scram                           control number for 1980 sample   
                                               design cases                     
                                                                                
                                               Blank for 1990 sample design     
                                               cases                            
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V6        Panel/     7   1-2    23-24     Panel 1-6                        
               Rotation                        Rotation Group 1-6               
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V7        Year/      7   3-4    25-27     Year 95                          
               Quarter     8   1                Quarter 1-2                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V8   2    202        9   4      28-28     Unit Status                      
                                                  1 Unit in sample the previous 
                                                    enumeration                 
                                                  2 Unit in sample first time   
                                                    this period                 
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V9   3    203       10    1     29-29     Household Status                 
                                                  1 Same household interviewed  
                                                                               
    Page 2                                                           ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                    the previous enumeration    
                                                  2 Replacement household since 
                                                    the previous enumeration    
                                                  3 Noninterview the previous   
                                                    enumeration                 
                                                  4 Other                       
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                  9 Out of universe             
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V10  4   204       10   2-3     30-31     Line Number of Household         
                                               Respondent                       
                                                  01-96 Actual line number      
                                                     98 Residue                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V11   5   205      10     4     32-33     Special place type code          
                        11     1                  97 Special place              
                                                  98 Residue                    
                                                  99 Blank or not a special     
                                                     place                      
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V12   6   206(0)   11     2     34-34     Tenure (Original)                
                                                  1 Owned or being bought       
                                                  2 Rented for cash             
                                                  3 No cash rent                
                                                  0, 4-9 Invalid entry          
                                                                                
     V13   6   206(A)   11     3     35-35     Tenure (Allocated)               
                                                  1 Owned or being bought       
                                                  2 Rented for cash             
                                                  3 No cash rent                
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V14   7   207(0)   11     4     36-36     Land Use (Original)              
                                                  1 Urban                       
                                                  2 Rural                       
                                                  0, 3-9 Invalid Entry          
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V15   7   207(A)   12     1     37-37     Land Use (Allocated)             
                                                  1 Urban                       
                                                  2 Rural                       
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V16   8   208(0)   12     2     38-38     Farm Sales (Original)            
                                                  1 $1,000 or more              
                                                  2 Less than $1.000            
                                                  7 Item Blank                  
                                                  0,3-6,8-9 Invalid Entry       
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V17   8   208(A)   12     3     39-39    Farm Sales (Allocated)            
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 3     
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                  1 $1,000 or more              
                                                  2 Less than $1,000            
                                                  7 Item Blank                  
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                               
    Page 4                                                           ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V18   9   209(0)   12     4     40-41    Type of Living Quarters (Original)
                        13     1                                                
                                              Housing Unit                      
                                                01 House, apartment, flat       
                                                02 Housing unit in              
                                                   nontransient hotel, motel etc
                                                03 Housing unit - permanent in  
                                                   transient hotel, motel etc.  
                                                04 Housing unit in rooming house
                                                05 Mobile home or trailer with  
                                                   no permanent room added      
                                                06 Mobile home/trailer with one 
                                                   or more permanent rooms added
                                                07 Housing unit not specified   
                                                   above                        
                                                                                
                                              Other Unit                        
                                                08 Quarters not housing unit in 
                                                   rooming or boarding house    
                                                09 Unit not permanent in        
                                                   transient hotel, motel. etc. 
                                                10 Unoccupied site for mobile   
                                                   home, trailer, or tent       
                                                11 Student quarters in college  
                                                   dormitory                    
                                                12 Other unit not specified     
                                                   above                        
                                          00,13-99 Invalid Entry                
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V19  9   209(A)    13   2-3   42-43  Type of Living Quarters (Allocated)   
                                             Housing Unit                       
                                                01 House, apartment, flat       
                                                02 Housing unit in nontransient 
                                                   hotel, motel, etc.           
                                                03 Housing unit - permanent in  
                                                   transient hotel, motel etc.  
                                                04 Housing unit in rooming house
                                                05 Mobile home or trailer with  
                                                   no permanent room added      
                                                06 Mobile home/trailer with one 
                                                   or more permanent rooms added
                                                07 Housing unit not specified   
                                                   above                        
                                                                                
                                             Other Unit                         
                                                08 Quarters not housing unit in 
                                                   rooming or boarding house    
                                                09 Unit not permanent in        
                                                   transient hotel, motel, etc. 
                                                10 Unoccupied site for mobile   
                                                   home, trailer or tent        
                                                11 Student quarters in college  
                                                   dormitory                    
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 5     
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                12 Other unit not specified     
                                                   above                        
                                                98 Residue                      
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V20 10a  210      13  4         44-44     Location of Phone                
                                                  1 Phone in unit               
                                                  2 Phone in common area (hallwa
                                                    etc.)                       
                                                  3 Phone in another unit       
                                                    (neighbor, friend, etc.)    
                                                  4 Work/office phone           
                                                  5 No phone                    
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V21  10b  211      14   1       45-45     Is phone interview acceptable?   
                                                  1 Yes                         
                                                  2 No                          
                                                  3 Refused to give phone number
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V22  11a  212      14   2-3     46-47     Number of Housing Units in       
                                               Structure                        
                                                  01 One                        
                                                  02 Two                        
                                                  03 Three                      
                                                  04 Four                       
                                                  05 Five-Nine                  
                                                  06 Ten or more                
                                                  07 Mobile home or trailer     
                                                  08 Only OTHER units           
                                                  98 Residue                    
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V23   11b  213      14    4     48-48     Direct Outside Access            
                                                  1 Yes                         
                                                  2 No                          
                                                  3 Don't know                  
                                                  7 Item blank                  
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V24   12   214      15    1-2   49-50     Household Income                 
                                                  01 Less than $5,000           
                                                  02 $5,000 to $7,499           
                                                  03 $7,500 to $9,999           
                                                  04 $10,000  to $12,499        
                                                  05 $12,500  to $14,999        
                                                  06 $15,000  to $17,499        
                                                  07 $17,500  to $19,999        
                                                  08 $20,000  to $24,999        
                                                  09 $25,000  to $29,999        
                                                  10 $30,000  to $34,999        
                                                  11 $35,000  to $39,999        
                                                                               
    Page 6                                                           ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                  12 $40,000  to $49,999        
                                                  13 $50,000  to $74,999        
                                                  14 $75,000  and over          
                                                  98 Residue                    
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V25        215      15    3-4   51-52      Month Interview or noninterview 
                                                completed                       
                                                  01-12 Actual month            
                                                     98 Residue                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V26                 16    1-2   53-54      Day Interview or noninterview   
                                                completed                       
                                                  01-31 Actual day of the month 
                                                     98 Residue                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V27                 16    3-4   55-56      Year Interview or noninterview  
                                                completed                       
                                                  92-94                         
                                                  98 Residue                    
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V28   6    216      17    1-2   57-58      Reason for Noninterview         
                                                Type A                          
                                                  01 No one home                
                                                  02 Temporarily absent         
                                                  03 Refused                    
                                                  04 Other occupied             
                                                                                
                                                Type B                          
                                                  10 Vacant-regular             
                                                  11 Vacant-storage of household
                                                     furniture                  
                                                  12 Temporarily occupied by    
                                                     persons with usual residenc
                                                     elsewhere                  
                                                  13 Unfit or to be demolished  
                                                  14 Under construction, not    
                                                     ready                      
                                                  15 Converted to temporary     
                                                     business or storage        
                                                  16 Unoccupied site for mobile 
                                                     home, trailer or tent      
                                                  17 Permit granted, constructio
                                                     not started                
                                                  18 Other                      
                                                                                
                                                Type C                          
                                                  20 Unused line of listing     
                                                     sheet                      
                                                  21 Demolished                 
                                                  22 House or trailer moved     
                                                  23 Outside segment            
                                                  24 Converted to permanent     
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 7     
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                     business or storage        
                                                  25 Merged                     
                                                  26 Condemned                  
                                                  27 Built after April 1, 1980  
                                                  28 Permit abandoned           
                                                  29 Other                      
                                                                                
                                                Interviewed                     
                                                  30 Interviewed Household      
                                                  98 Residue                    
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V29   7    217      17    3     59-59     Race of household head (Type A)  
                                                  1 White                       
                                                  2 Black                       
                                                  3 Other                       
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                               
    Page 8                                                           ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                Principal Person Information    
                                                ----------------------------    
                                                                                
     V30   20   403      17    4     60-61      Relationship to reference person
                         18    1                  1 Husband                     
                                                  2 Wife                        
                                                  3 Son                         
                                                  4 Daughter                    
                                                  5 Father                      
                                                  6 Mother                      
                                                  7 Brother                     
                                                  8 Sister                      
                                                  9 Other relative              
                                                 10 Nonrelative                 
                                                 11 Reference person            
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V31   21   404(A)   18    2-3   62-63      Age Last Birthday (Allocated)   
                                                  12-90 Age                     
                                                     98 Residue                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V32   22a  405      18    4     64-64      Marital status this survey perio
                                                  1 Married                     
                                                  2 Widowed                     
                                                  3 Divorced                    
                                                  4 Separated                   
                                                  5 Never married               
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V33   22b  406      19    1     65-65     Marital status last survey period
                                                  1 Married                     
                                                  2 Widowed                     
                                                  3 Divorced                    
                                                  4 Separated                   
                                                  5 Never married               
                                                  6 Not interviewed last survey 
                                                    period                      
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V34   23   407(A)   19    2     66-66     Sex                              
                                                  1 Male                        
                                                  2 Female                      
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V35   24   408      19    3     67-67      Armed Forces Member (Is...now   
                                                in the Armed Forces?)           
                                                  1 Yes                         
                                                  2 No                          
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 9     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V36   25a  409      19    4     68-69      Education (What is the highest  
                         20    1                grade (or year) of regular schoo
                                                you have ever attended?)        
                                                  00 Never attended or          
                                                     kindergarten               
                                                  01-08 Elementary              
                                                  09-12 High School             
                                                  21-26 College                 
                                                     98 Residue                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V37   25b  410      20    2     70-70      Education (Did you complete that
                                                year?)                          
                                                  1 Yes                         
                                                  2 No                          
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V38   27   412(A)   20    3     71-71     Race (Allocated)                 
                                                  1 White                       
                                                  2 Black                       
                                                  3 American Indian, Aleut,     
                                                    Eskimo                      
                                                  4 Asian, Pacific Islander     
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V39   28   413      20    4     72-72      Hispanic Origin                 
                                                  1 Yes                         
                                                  2 No                          
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                               
    Page 10                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                Reference Person Information    
                                                ----------------------------    
                                                                                
     V40   21   404(A)   21    1-2   73-74      Age last birthday (Allocated)   
                                                  12-90 Age                     
                                                     98 Residue                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V41   22a  405      21    3     75-75      Marital status this survey perio
                                                  1 Married                     
                                                  2 Widowed                     
                                                  3 Divorced                    
                                                  4 Separated                   
                                                  5 Never married               
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V42   22b  406      21    4     76-76      Marital status last survey perio
                                                  1 Married                     
                                                  2 Widowed                     
                                                  3 Divorced                    
                                                  4 Separated                   
                                                  5 Never married               
                                                  6 Not interviewed last survey 
                                                    period                      
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V43   23   407(A)   22    1     77-77     Sex (Allocated)                  
                                                  1 Male                        
                                                  2 Female                      
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V44   24   408      22    2     78-78     Armed  Forces Member             
                                                  1 Yes                         
                                                  2 No                          
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V45   25a  409      22    3-4   79-80      Education (What is the highest  
                                                grade (or year) of regular schoo
                                                you have attended?)             
                                                  00 Never attended or          
                                                     kindergarden               
                                                  01-08 Elementary              
                                                  09-12 High School             
                                                  21-26 College                 
                                                     98 Residue                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V46   25b  410      23    1     81-81      Education (Did you complete that
                                                year?)                          
                                                  1 Yes                         
                                                  2 No                          
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 11    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V47    27   412(A)  23    2     82-82      Race (Allocated)                
                                                  1 White                       
                                                  2 Black                       
                                                  3 American Indian. Aleut,     
                                                    Eskimo                      
                                                  4 Asian, Pacific Islander     
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V48   28   413      23    3     83-83     Hispanic Origin                  
                                                  1 Yes                         
                                                  2 No                          
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V49   13a  301      23    4     84-85     Line number of person for whom a 
                         24    1               proxy interview was obtained     
                                               (first person)                   
                                                  01-96 Actual line number      
                                                     98 Residue                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V50   13b  302      24    2-3   85-87     Line number of proxy respondent  
                                               (first person)                   
                                                  01-87, 89-96 Actual line      
                                                               number           
                                                     88 Non-household member as 
                                                        proxy respondent        
                                                     98 Residue                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V51   13c  303      24    4     88-88      Reason for proxy interview (firs
                                                person)                         
                                                  1 12-13 yrs old & parent      
                                                    refused permission for self 
                                                    interview                   
                                                  2 Physically/mentally unable  
                                                    to answer                   
                                                  3 Temporarily absent and won't
                                                    return before closeout      
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                  9 Out of universe             
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V52   13a  304      25    1-2   89-90      Line number of person for whom a
                                                proxy interview was obtained    
                                                (second person)                 
                                                  01-96 Actual line number      
                                                     98 Residue                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V53   13b  305      25    3-4   91-92      Line number of proxy respondent 
                                                (second person)                 
                                                                               
    Page 12                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                  01-87,89-96 Actual line number
                                                     88 Non-household member as 
                                                        proxy respondent        
                                                     98 Residue                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V54   13c  306      26    1     93-93      Reason for proxy interview      
                                                (second person)                 
                                                  1 12-13 yrs old & parent      
                                                    refused permission for self 
                                                    interview                   
                                                  2 Physically/mentally unable  
                                                    to answer                   
                                                  3 Temporarily absent and won't
                                                    return before closeout      
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V55   13a  307      26    2-3     94-95    Line number of person for whom a
                                                proxy interview was obtained    
                                                (third person)                  
                                                  01-96 Actual line number      
                                                     98 Residue                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V56   13b  308      26    4       96-97    Line number of proxy respondent 
                         27    1                (third person)                  
                                                  01-87,89-96 Actual line number
                                                     88 Non-household member as 
                                                        proxy respondent        
                                                     98 Residue                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V57   13c  309      27    2       98-98    Reason for proxy interview      
                                                (third person)                  
                                                  1 12-13 yrs old & parent      
                                                    refused permission for self 
                                                    interview                   
                                                  2 Physically/Mentally unable t
                                                    answer                      
                                                  3 Temporarily absent and won't
                                                    return before closeout      
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V58   13a  310      27    3-4     99-100   Line number of person for whom a
                                                proxy interview was obtained    
                                                (fourth person)                 
                                                  01-96 Actual line number      
                                                     98 Residue                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V59   13b  311      28    1-2     101-102  Line number of proxy respondent 
                                                (fourth person)                 
                                                  01-87,89-96 Actual line number
                                                     88 Non-household member as 
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 13    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                        proxy respondent        
                                                     98 Residue                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V60   13c  312      28    3       103-103  Reason for proxy interview      
                                                (fourth person)                 
                                                  1 12-13 yrs old & parent      
                                                    refused permission for      
                                                    self interview              
                                                  2 Physically/Mentally unable  
                                                    to answer                   
                                                  3 Temporarily absent and won't
                                                    return before closeout      
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V61   14a  313      28    4       104-105  Line number of Type Z           
                         29    1                Non-interview (first person)    
                                                  O1-96 Actual line number      
                                                     98 Residue                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V62   14b  314      29    2       106-106  Reason for Type Z Non-interview 
                                                (first person)                  
                                                  1 Never available             
                                                  2 Refused                     
                                                  3 Physically/Mentally unable t
                                                    answer -- no proxy available
                                                  4 Temporarily absent and no   
                                                    proxy available             
                                                  5 Other                       
                                                  6 Office use only             
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V63   14a  315      29    3-4     107-108  Line number of Type Z           
                                                Non-interview (second person)   
                                                  01-96 Actual line number      
                                                     98 Residue                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V64   14b  316      30    1       109-109  Reason for Type Z Non-interview 
                                                (second person)                 
                                                  1 Never available             
                                                  2 Refused                     
                                                  3 Physically/Mentally unable t
                                                    answer -- no proxy available
                                                  4 Temporarily absent and no   
                                                    proxy available             
                                                  5 Other                       
                                                  6 Office use only             
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V65   14a  317      30    2-3     110-111  Line number of Type Z           
                                                Non-interview (third person)    
                                                                               
    Page 14                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                  01-96 Actual line number      
                                                     98 Residue                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V66   14b  318      30    4       112-112  Reason for Type Z Non-interview 
                                                (third person)                  
                                                  1 Never available             
                                                  2 Refused                     
                                                  3 Physically/Mentally unable t
                                                    answer -- no proxy available
                                                  4 Temporarily absent and no   
                                                    proxy available             
                                                  5 Other                       
                                                  6 Office use only             
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V67   14a  319      31    1-2     113-114  Line number of Type Z           
                                                Non-interview (fourth person)   
                                                  01-96 Actual line number      
                                                     98 Residue                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V68   14b  320      31    3       115-115  Reason for Type Z Non-interview 
                                                (fourth person)                 
                                                  1 Never available             
                                                  2 Refused                     
                                                  3 Physically/Mentally unable  
                                                    to answer - no proxy availab
                                                  4 Temporarily absent and no   
                                                    proxy available             
                                                  5 Other                       
                                                  6 Office use only             
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V69   15a  321      31    4       116-117  Number of household members 12  
                         32    1                years of age and over           
                                                  01-13 Number of household memb
                                                     98 Residue                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V70   15b  322      32    2-3     118-118  Number of household members unde
                                                12 years of age                 
                                                  00-09 Number                  
                                                     98 Residue                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V71   16   323      32    4       119-120  Number of crime incident reports
                         33    1                filled                          
                                                  00-18 Number                  
                                                     98 Residue                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V72   34   530      33    2       121-121  Does anyone in this household   
                                                operate a business from this    
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 15    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                address?                        
                                                  1 Yes                         
                                                  2 No                          
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V73   35   531      33    3       122-122  Is there a sign on the premises 
                                                some other indication to the    
                                                general public that a business  
                                                is operated from this address?  
                                                  1 Yes                         
                                                  2 No                          
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V74   37b  534      33    4       123-123 (Other than any incidents already
                                               mentioned,) has anyone-          
                                                                                
                                               (a) Broken in or attempted to    
                                                   break into your home by      
                                                   forcing a door or window,    
                                                   pushing past someone,        
                                                   jimmying a lock, cutting a   
                                                   screen, or entering through  
                                                   an open door or window?      
                                                                                
                                               (b) Has anyone illegally gotten  
                                                   in or tried to get into a    
                                                   garage, shed or storage room?
                                                                                
                                               OR                               
                                                                                
                                               (c) Illegally gotten in or tried 
                                                   to get into a hotel or motel 
                                                   room or vacation home where  
                                                   you were staying?            
                                                                                
                                               Did any incidents of this type   
                                               happen to you?                   
                                                 1 Yes                          
                                                 2 No                           
                                                 3 Refused                      
                                                 8 Residue                      
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V75   37c  535      34    1-3     124-126 How many times?                  
                                                 000-996 Number                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V76   38   536      34    4       127-127 What was the total number of     
                                               cars, vans, trucks, motorcycles, 
                                               or other motor vehicles owned    
                                               by you or any other member of    
                                               this household during last 6     
                                               months? Include those you no     
                                               longer own.                      
                                                                               
    Page 16                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                  0 None                        
                                                  1 One                         
                                                  2 Two                         
                                                  3 Three                       
                                                  4 Four or more                
                                                  8 Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V77   39b  537      35    1       128-128 During the last 6 months (other  
                                               than any incidents already       
                                               mentioned) (was it/were any of   
                                               them)-                           
                                                                                
                                                 Stolen or used without         
                                                 permission?                    
                                                                                
                                                 Did anyone steal any parts     
                                                 such as a tire, tape deck,     
                                                 hubcap or battery?             
                                                                                
                                                 Did anyone steal gas from      
                                                 (it/them)?                     
                                                                                
                                                 OR                             
                                                                                
                                                 Did anyone attempt to steal    
                                                 any vehicle or parts attached  
                                                 to (it/them)?                  
                                                                                
                                                   1 Yes                        
                                                   2 No                         
                                                   3 Refused                    
                                                   8 Residue                    
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V78   39c  538      35    2-4     129-131 How many times?                  
                                                 000-996 Number                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V79   46a  557      36    1       132-132 Now I'd like to ask about        
                                               vandalism that may have been     
                                               committed during the last 6      
                                               months against your household.   
                                               Vandalism is the deliberate,     
                                               intentional damage to or         
                                               destruction of property.         
                                               Examples are breaking windows,   
                                               slashing tires, and painting     
                                               graffiti on walls. Since (month) 
                                               (day), 19(year), has anyone      
                                               intentionally damaged or         
                                               destroyed property owned by you  
                                               or someone else in your          
                                               household? (Exclude any damage   
                                               done in conjunction with         
                                               incidents already mentioned.)    
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 17    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                 1 Yes                          
                                                 2 No                           
                                                 3 Refused                      
                                                 8 Residue                      
                                                                                
                                                                               
    Page 18                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V80   46b  558      36    2       133-133 What kind of property was        
                                               damaged or destroyed in this/    
                                               these act(s) or vandalism?       
                                               Anything else?                   
                                                                                
                                               Lead-in code                     
                                               ------------                     
                                                1 At least one good entry       
                                                  in one or more of the         
                                                  answer category codes 1-9.    
                                                                                
                                                8 No good entry (out of range)  
                                                  in any of the answer category 
                                                  codes 1-9.                    
                                                                                
                                                  NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry,   
                                                  the lead-in code is equal to  
                                                  1, the category codes are     
                                                  equal to 0 and the residue    
                                                  code is equal to 8.           
                                                                                
                                               Category codes                   
                                               --------------                   
                                                1 Indicates an entry in the     
                                                  following category positions. 
                                                                                
                                                0 Indicates no entry in the     
                                                  following category positions. 
                                                                                
                                                8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL    
                                                  of the following category     
                                                  positions are blank           
                                                                                
                                                -------                         
                                                                                
     V81                 36    3       134-134  1 Motor vehicle (including      
                                                  parts)                        
                                                                                
     V82                 36    4       135-135  2 Bicycle (including parts)     
                                                                                
     V83                 37    1       136-136  3 Mailbox                       
                                                                                
     V84                 37    2       137-137  4 House                         
                                                  window/screen/door            
                                                                                
     V85                 37    3       138-138  5 Yard or garden (trees, shrubs,
                                                  fence, etc.)                  
                                                                                
     V86                 37    4       139-139  6 Furniture, other household    
                                                  goods                         
                                                                                
     V87                 38    1       140-140  7 Clothing                      
                                                                                
     V88                 38    2       141-141  8 Animal (pet, livestock, etc.) 
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 19    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V89                 38    3       142-142  9 Other                         
                                                                                
     V90                 38    4       143-143  Residue Codes                   
                                                _____________                   
                                                                                
                                                0 The item contains no out of   
                                                  range entries                 
                                                                                
                                                8 The item contains one or more 
                                                  out of range entries          
                                                                                
     V91  46c  559    39  1           144-144 What kind of damage was done in   
                                              this/these act(s) of vandalism?   
                                              Anything else?                    
                                                                                
                                              Lead-in code                      
                                                                                
                                                1    At least one good entry in 
                                                     one or more of the         
                                                     answer category codes      
                                                     1-7.                       
                                                                                
                                                8    No good entry (out of      
                                                     range) in any of the       
                                                     answer category codes      
                                                     1-7.                       
                                                                                
                                                     NOTE:  For a "Yes-NA"      
                                                     entry, the lead-in code is 
                                                     equal to 1, the category   
                                                     codes are equal to 0 and   
                                                     the residue code is equal  
                                                     to 8.                      
                                                                                
                                              Category codes                    
                                                                                
                                                1    Indicates an entry in the  
                                                     following category         
                                                     positions.                 
                                                                                
                                                0    Indicates no entry in the  
                                                     following category         
                                                     positions.                 
                                                                                
                                                8    Indicates an "NA" when     
                                                     ALL of the following       
                                                     category positions are     
                                                     blank.                     
                                              __________                        
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V92              39  1           145-145   1    Broken glass:window,       
                                                     windshield, glass in       
                                                     door, mirror               
                                                                                
                                                                               
    Page 20                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V93                  3           146-146   2    Defaced: marred, graffiti, 
                                                     dirtied                    
                                                                                
     V94                  4           147-147   3    Burned: use of fire, heat  
                                                     or explosives              
                                                                                
     V95              40  1           148-148   4    Drove into or ran over     
                                                     with vehicle               
                                                                                
     V96                  2           149-149   5    Other breaking or tearing  
                                                                                
     V97                  3           150-150   6    Injured or killed animals  
                                                                                
     V98                  4           151-151   7    Other                      
                                                                                
     V99              41  1           152-152   Residue Codes                   
                                                                                
                                                0    The item contains no out   
                                                     of range entries           
                                                                                
                                                8    The item contains one or   
                                                     more out of range entries  
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V100  46d  560    41  2-4      153-157 What was the total dollar amount of 
                       42  1-2              the damage caused by this/these     
                                            act(s) of vandalism during the last 
                                            6 months?  (Use repair costs if the 
                                            property was repaired.)  (Exclude   
                                            any damage done in incidents        
                                            already mentioned.)                 
                                                  00000     No cost             
                                            00001-99996     Actual dollar       
                                                            amount in           
                                                            whole dollars       
                                                  99997     Don't know          
                                                  99998     Residue             
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V101 46e  561    42  3        158-158 Was the damage under $100 or         
                                           $100 or more? (Include total amount  
                                           for all incidents of vandalism during
                                           the last 6 months.)                  
                                               1    Under $100                  
                                               2    $100 or more                
                                               3    Don't know                  
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V102 Check 562   42  4        159-159 In the vandalism just mentioned,     
          Item F                           were you (was the respondent)        
                                           attacked or threatened, or was       
                                           something stolen or an attempt made  
                                           to steal something that belonged to  
                                           you (the respondent) or another      
                                           household member? (Other than any    
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 21    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                           incident(s) already mentioned?)      
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Refused                     
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V103 46f  563    43  1-3      160-162 How many times?                      
                                               000-996   Number                 
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V104 49   571    43  4        163-163 We're interested in finding out if   
                                           people we talk to do anything in     
                                           particular to keep thieves or        
                                           intruders out of their homes.  Does  
                                           your household have any special      
                                           devices such as dead bolts, electric 
                                           timers for lights, or an alarm       
                                           system.  Do not include animals.     
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V105 50a  572    44  1        164-164 Is there an organized neighborhood   
                                           watch or citizens' protection group  
                                           for your area?                       
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Don't know                  
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V106 50b  573    44  2        165-165 Do you, or does anyone in your       
                                           household, take part?                
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Don't know                  
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V107      CATI   50  2        166-166 CATI Group                           
               GRP                             1    Non-CATI (includes          
                                                    CATI-eligible but not       
                                                    sent)                       
                                               2    Completed CATI              
                                                    interview                   
                                               3    Recycled from a             
                                                    telephone center            
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V108      HH     61  1-4      167-178 Household Weight                     
              WEIGHT  62  1-4                                                   
                      63  1-4              Weighting factor is used to tabulate 
                                           NCVS household crime                 
                                           estimates/rates.                     
                                                                               
    Page 22                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                           This weighting factor contains five  
                                           implied decimal places.              
                                           This weighting factor will contain   
                                           all zeros for noninterview           
                                           households.                          
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V109      PSEUDO- 64 1-3      179-181 Pseudostratum Code                   
               STRATUM                       001-996   Pseudostratum code       
                                                                                
                                           (NOTE: Filled for 1990 sample        
                                           cases only)                          
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V110      SECU   64  4        182-182 Standard Error Computation Unit      
               CODE                        Code (Old)                           
                                               1-2 Secucode                     
                                                                                
                                           (NOTE: Filled for 1990 sample        
                                                  cases only)                   
                                           (NOTE: Also called Half Sample       
                                                  Code)                         
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V111 12b  218    65  1        183-183 College/University                   
                                               1  Yes                           
                                               2  No                            
                                               8  Residue                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V112 12c  219    65  2        184-184 Public Housing                       
                                               1  Yes (public housing)          
                                               2  No (not public housing)       
                                               8  Residue                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V113 12d  220    65  3        185-185 Manager Verification of Public       
                                           Housing                              
                                            Able to verify                      
                                               1  Public Housing                
                                               2 Not public housing             
                                            Unable to verify                    
                                               3 CATI/Telephone                 
                                               4 Other                          
                                               8 Residue                        
                                                                                
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 23    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V114      FAMILY 66  1-2      186-187 Family Structure Codes               
            STRUCTURE                          01   Male reference person,      
                                                    wife, children, relatives   
                                                    only                        
                                               02   Male reference person,      
                                                    wife, children,             
                                                    nonrelatives                
                                               03   Male reference person,      
                                                    wife, children, relatives   
                                                    and nonrelatives            
                                               04   Male reference person,      
                                                    wife, children only         
                                               05   Male reference person,      
                                                    wife, relatives only        
                                               06   Male reference person,      
                                                    wife, nonrelatives only     
                                               07   Male reference person,      
                                                    wife, relatives and         
                                                    non-relatives               
                                               08   Male reference person,      
                                                    wife only                   
                                               09   Lone male reference         
                                                    person, children, relatives 
                                                    only                        
                                               10   Lone male reference         
                                                    person, children,           
                                                    nonrelatives only           
                                               11   Lone male reference         
                                                    person, children, relatives 
                                                    and nonrelatives            
                                               12   Lone male reference         
                                                    person, children only       
                                               13   Lone male reference         
                                                    person, relatives only      
                                               14   Lone male reference         
                                                    person, nonrelatives only   
                                               15   Lone male reference         
                                                    person, relatives and       
                                                    nonrelatives                
                                               16   Lone male reference         
                                                    person only                 
                                               17   Female reference person,    
                                                    husband, children,          
                                                    relatives only              
                                               18   Female reference person,    
                                                    husband, children,          
                                                    nonrelatives only           
                                               19   Female reference person,    
                                                    husband, children,          
                                                    relatives and non-relatives 
                                               20   Female reference person,    
                                                    husband, children only      
                                               21   Female reference            
                                                    person,husband, relatives   
                                                                               
    Page 24                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                    only                        
                                               22   Female reference            
                                                    person,husband,             
                                                    nonrelatives only           
                                               23   Female reference            
                                                    person,husband, relatives   
                                                    and non-relatives           
                                               24   Female reference person,    
                                                    husband only                
                                               25   Lone female reference       
                                                    person, children, relatives 
                                                    only                        
                                               26   Lone female reference       
                                                    person, children,           
                                                    nonrelatives only           
                                               27   Lone female reference       
                                                    person, children, relatives 
                                                    and nonrelatives            
                                               28   Lone female reference       
                                                    person, children only       
                                               29   Lone female reference       
                                                    person, relatives only      
                                               30   Lone female reference       
                                                    person, nonrelatives only   
                                               31   Lone female reference       
                                                    person, relatives and       
                                                    non-relatives               
                                               32   Lone female reference       
                                                    person only                 
                                               33   Other combinations          
                                               98   Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V115      INTV   66  3        188-188 Interview Code                       
               CODE                            1    Interview                   
                                               2    Type A                      
                                               3    Type B                      
                                               4    Type C                      
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V116      INC/   66  4        189-189 Incoming or Continuing Rotations     
               CONT                            1    Incoming                    
                                               2    Continuing                  
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V117      LAND   67  1        190-190 Land Use                             
               USE                             1    Urban                       
                                               2    Rural                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V118      PLACE  67  2-3      191-192 Place Size Code                      
               SIZE                                                             
                                           Code reflects 1990 population.       
                                                                                
                                               00   Not in a place              
                                               03   Under 999                   
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 25    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               08   1,000-9,999                 
                                               10   10,000-24,999               
                                               11   25,000-49,999               
                                               12   50,000-99,999               
                                               13   100,000-249,999             
                                               14   250,000-499,999             
                                               15   500,000-999,999             
                                               16   1,000,000 or more           
                                                                                
                                           NOTE:  Places under 2,500 are        
                                           considered rural by definition.      
                                                                                
                                           NOTE:  Code reflects 1980            
                                           geography.                           
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V119      PLACE  67  4        193-193 Place Description                    
               DESC                            5    Unincorporated place        
                                               7    Not a place                 
                                               8    Central city of an MSA      
                                                    only AND central city of    
                                                    both an urbanized area      
                                                    and an MSA                  
                                               9    Central city of an          
                                                    urbanized area but not      
                                                    MSA AND any other           
                                                    incorporated place          
                                                                                
                                           NOTE:  Code reflects 1980            
                                           geography.                           
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V120      TYPE   68  1        194-194 Type of Segment                      
               SEG                             1    Address                     
                                               2    Special Place               
                                               3    Area                        
                                               4    New Construction -          
                                                    Stratum I                   
                                               5    New Construction -          
                                                    Stratum II                  
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V121      1980   68  2        195-195 1980 MSA Status                      
               MSA/                            1    Central city of an          
               STAT                                         (S)MSA              
                                               2    In (S)MSA but not in        
                                                    central city                
                                               3    Not (S)MSA                  
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                           NOTE:  Code reflects 1980            
                                           geography.                           
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V122      MONTH  68  3-4      196-196 Month Allocated                      
               A PAN/                      From Panel/Rotation Number           
                                                                               
    Page 26                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
               ROT                                                              
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V123      YEAR A 69  3        197-198 Year Allocated                       
               PAN/                        From Panel/Rotation Number           
               ROT                                                              
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V124 26   PRIN411 69 3        199-199 Principle Person Information         
                                           ----------------------------         
                                                                                
                                               Attending college                
                                                    1    College/University     
                                                    2    Trade school           
                                                    3    Vocational school      
                                                    4    Not at all             
                                                    8    Residue                
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V125 26   REF411 69  4        200-200 Reference Person Information         
                                           ----------------------------         
                                                                                
                                               Attending college                
                                                    1    College/University     
                                                    2    Trade school           
                                                    3    Vocational school      
                                                    4    Not at all             
                                                    8    Residue                
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V126 19   402     70   4      201-202 Line Number                          
                       71   1                  01-96     Actual Line Number     
                                               98        Residue                
                                                                                
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 27    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                   PERSON SECTION                               
                                   --------------                               
               SOURCE                                                           
     VAR ITEM  CODE  WORD DIGIT  CHARACTER   ITEM & CODES                       
     ____________________________________________________________               
                                                                                
     V127 18   401    71  2        203-203 Type of Interview                    
                                               1    Personal, Self-respondent   
                                               2    Telephone, Self-respondent  
                                               3    Personal, Proxy             
                                               4    Telephone, Proxy            
                                               5    Noninterview                
                                               6    Noninterview (created)      
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V128 20   403    72  1-2      204-205 Relationship to reference person     
                                               01   Husband                     
                                               02   Wife                        
                                               03   Son                         
                                               04   Daughter                    
                                               05   Father                      
                                               06   Mother                      
                                               07   Brother                     
                                               08   Sister                      
                                               09   Other relative              
                                               10   Nonrelative                 
                                               11   Reference person            
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V129 21   404(O) 72  3-4      206-207 Age Last Birthday (Original)         
                                               00-90     Actual Age             
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V130 21   404(A) 73  1-2      208-209 Age Last Birthday (Allocated)        
                                               12-90     Age                    
                                               98        Residue                
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V131 22a  405    73  3        210-210 Marital status this survey period    
                                               1    Married                     
                                               2    Widowed                     
                                               3    Divorced                    
                                               4    Separated                   
                                               5    Never married               
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V132 22b  406    73  4        211-211 Marital status last survey period    
                                               1    Married                     
                                               2    Widowed                     
                                               3    Divorced                    
                                               4    Separated                   
                                               5    Never married               
                                                                               
    Page 28                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               6    Not interviewed last        
                                                    survey period               
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V133 23   407(O) 74  1        212-212 Sex (Original)                       
                                               1         Male                   
                                               2         Female                 
                                               0, 3-9    Invalid Entry          
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V134 23   407(A) 74  2        213-213 Sex (Allocated)                      
                                               1    Male                        
                                               2    Female                      
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V135 24   408    74  3        214-214 Armed Forces member (Is ... now      
                                           in the Armed Forces?)                
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V136 25   409    74  4        215-216 Education (What is the highest grade 
                      75  1                or year of regular school ... has    
                                           ever attended?)                      
                                               00        Never attended or      
                                                         kindergarten           
                                               01-08     Elementary             
                                               09-12     High school            
                                               21-26     College                
                                               98        Residue                
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V137 26   410    75  2        217-217 Education (Did ... complete that     
                                           year?)                               
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V138 27   412(O) 75  3        218-218 Race (Original)                      
                                               1         White                  
                                               2         Black                  
                                               3         American Indian,       
                                                         Aleut, Eskimo          
                                               4         Asian, Pacific         
                                                         Islander               
                                               5         Other                  
                                               0, 6-9    Invalid Entry          
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V139 27   412(A) 75  4        219-219 Race (Allocated)                     
                                               1    White                       
                                               2    Black                       
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 29    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               3    American Indian, Aleut,     
                                                    Eskimo                      
                                               4    Asian, Pacific Islander     
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V140 28   413    76  1        220-220 Hispanic origin                      
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V141 29   501    76  2-3      221-222 Month interview completed            
                                           01-12    Actual month                
                                              98    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V142             76  4        223-224 Day interview completed              
                      77  1                01-31    Actual day of the           
                                                    month                       
                                              98    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V143             77  2-3      225-226 Year interview completed             
                                           92-94    Actual year                 
                                              98    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V144 30   502    77  4        227-227 Before we get to the crime           
                                           questions, I'd like to ask you about 
                                           some of your usual activities.  We   
                                           have found that people with          
                                           different lifestyles may be more or  
                                           less likely to become victims of     
                                           crime.                               
                                                                                
                                           On average, during the last 6        
                                           months, that is, since _____ _____,  
                                           19__, how often have you gone        
                                           shopping?  For example at drug,      
                                           clothing, grocery, hardware, and     
                                           convenience stores.                  
                                               1    Almost every day (or        
                                                    more frequently)            
                                               2    At least once a week        
                                               3    At least once a month       
                                               4    Less often                  
                                               5    Never                       
                                               6    Don't know                  
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V145 31   503    78  1        228-228 (On average, during the last 6       
                                           months,) how often have you spent    
                                           the evening out away from home for   
                                           work, school or entertainment?       
                                                                               
    Page 30                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               1    Almost every evening (or    
                                                    more frequently)            
                                               2    At least once a week        
                                               3    At least once a month       
                                               4    Less often                  
                                               5    Never                       
                                               6    Don't know                  
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V146 32   504    78  2        229-229 (On average, during the last 6       
                                           months,) how often have you ridden   
                                           public transportation?  Do not       
                                           include school buses.                
                                               1    Almost every day (or        
                                                    more frequently)            
                                               2    At least once a week        
                                               3    At least once a month       
                                               4    Less often                  
                                               5    Never                       
                                               6    Don't know                  
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V147 33a  505    78  3-4      230-231 How long have you lived at this      
                                           address? (months)                    
                                            01-11    Number of months           
                                               98    Residue                    
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V148 33a  506    79  1-2      232-233 How long have you lived at this      
                                           address? (years)                     
                                            01-96    Number of years            
                                               98    Residue                    
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V149 33b  508    79  3-4      234-235 Altogether, how many times have      
                                           you moved in the last 5 years, that  
                                           is, since _________, _____, 19__?    
                                            01-96    Number of times            
                                               98    Residue                    
                                                                                
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 31    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V150 36a/ 532    80  1        236-236 Was something belonging to you       
          36b                              stolen, such as-                     
                                                                                
                                               Things that you carry, like      
                                               luggage, a wallet, purse,        
                                               briefcase, book-                 
                                                                                
                                               Clothing, jewelry, or            
                                               calculator-                      
                                                                                
                                               Bicycle or sports equipment-     
                                                                                
                                               Things in your house-like a      
                                               TV, stereo, or tools-            
                                                                                
                                               Things outside your home such    
                                               as a garden hose or lawn         
                                               furniture-                       
                                                                                
                                               Things belonging to children in  
                                               the household-                   
                                                                                
                                               Things from a vehicle, such as   
                                               a package, groceries, camera,    
                                               or cassette tapes-               
                                                                                
                                           OR                                   
                                                                                
                                               Did anyone attempt to steal      
                                               anything belonging to you?       
                                                                                
                                           Did any incidents of this type       
                                           happen to you?                       
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Refused                     
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V151 36c  533    80  2-4      237-239 How many times?                      
                                            000-996  Number of times            
                                                998  Residue                    
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V152 37a/ 534    81  1        240-240 (Other than any incidents already    
          37b                              mentioned, ) has anyone-             
                                                                                
                                               Broken in or attempted to        
                                               break into your home by          
                                               forcing a door or window,        
                                               pushing past someone,            
                                               jimmying a lock, cutting a       
                                               screen, or entering through an   
                                                                               
    Page 32                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               open door or window?             
                                                                                
                                               Has anyone illegally gotten in   
                                               or tried to get into a garage,   
                                               shed or storage room?            
                                                                                
                                           OR                                   
                                                                                
                                               Illegally gotten in or tried to  
                                               get into a hotel or motel room   
                                               or vacation home where you       
                                               were staying?                    
                                                                                
                                           Did any incidents of this type       
                                           happen to you?                       
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Refused                     
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V153 37c  535    81  2-4      241-243 How many times?                      
                                            000-996  Number of times            
                                                998  Residue                    
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V154 39a/  537 82  1          244-244 During the last 6 months (other than 
          39b                              any incidents already mentioned)     
                                           (was it/were any of them) -          
                                                                                
                                               Stolen or used without           
                                               permission?                      
                                                                                
                                               Did anyone steal any parts       
                                               such as a tire, tape deck,       
                                               hubcap or battery?               
                                                                                
                                               Did anyone steal any gas from    
                                               (it/them)?                       
                                                                                
                                           OR                                   
                                                                                
                                               Did anyone attempt to steal      
                                               any vehicle or parts attached    
                                               to (it/them)?                    
                                                                                
                                           Did any incidents of this type       
                                           happen to you?                       
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Refused                     
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V155 39c  538     82  2-4     245-247 How many times?                      
                                            000-996  Number of times            
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 33    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                998  Residue                    
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V156 40a/ 539     83  1       248-248 (Other than any incidents already    
          40b                              mentioned,) since _____ ___, 19__,   
                                           were you attacked or threatened or   
                                           did you have something stolen from   
                                           you-                                 
                                                                                
                                               At home including the porch      
                                               or yard-                         
                                                                                
                                               At or near a friend's,           
                                               relative's, or neighbor's home-  
                                                                                
                                               At work or school-               
                                                                                
                                               In places such as a storage      
                                               shed or laundry room, a          
                                               shopping mall, restaurant,       
                                               bank, or airport-                
                                                                                
                                               While riding in any vehicle-     
                                                                                
                                               On the street or in a parking    
                                               lot-                             
                                                                                
                                               At such places as a party,       
                                               theater, gym, picnic area,       
                                               bowling lanes, or while fishing  
                                               or hunting-                      
                                                                                
                                           OR                                   
                                                                                
                                               Did anyone attempt to attack     
                                               or attempt to steal anything     
                                               belonging to you from any of     
                                               these places?                    
                                                                                
                                           Did any incidents of this type       
                                           happen to you?                       
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Refused                     
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V157 40c  540    83  2-4      249-251 How many times?                      
                                            000-996  Number of times            
                                                998  Residue                    
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V158 41a/ 541    84  1        252-252 (Other than any incidents already    
          41b                              mentioned,) has anyone attacked or   
                                           threatened you in any of these ways- 
                                                                                
                                                                               
    Page 34                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               With any weapon, for instance,   
                                               a gun or knife-                  
                                                                                
                                               With anything like a baseball    
                                               bat, frying pan, scissors, or    
                                               stick-                           
                                                                                
                                               By something thrown, such as     
                                               a rock or bottle-                
                                                                                
                                               Include any grabbing,            
                                               punching, or choking,            
                                                                                
                                               Any rape, attempted rape, or     
                                               other type of sexual attack-     
                                                                                
                                               Any face to face threats-        
                                                                                
                                               OR                               
                                                                                
                                               Any attack or threat or use of   
                                               force by anyone at all?  Please  
                                               mention it even if you are not   
                                               certain it was a crime.          
                                                                                
                                           Did any incidents of this type       
                                           happen to you?                       
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Refused                     
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V159 41c  542    84  2-4      253-255 How many times?                      
                                            000-996  Number of times            
                                                998  Residue                    
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V160 42a/ 543    85  1        256-256 People often don't think of incidents
          42b                              committed by someone they know.      
                                           (Other than any incidents already    
                                           mentioned,) did you have something   
                                           stolen from you or were you          
                                           attacked or threatened by-           
                                                                                
                                               Someone at work or school-       
                                                                                
                                               A neighbor or friend-            
                                                                                
                                               A relative or family member-     
                                                                                
                                               Any other person you've met      
                                               or known?                        
                                                                                
                                           Did any incidents of this type       
                                           happen to you?                       
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 35    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Refused                     
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V161 42c  544    85  2-4      257-259 How many times?                      
                                            000-996  Number of times            
                                                998  Residue                    
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V162 43a/ 545    86  1        260-260 Incidents involving forced or        
          43b                              unwanted sexual acts are often       
                                           difficult to talk about.  (Other than
                                           any incidents already mentioned),    
                                           have you been forced or coerced to   
                                           engage in unwanted sexual activity   
                                           by-                                  
                                                                                
                                            Someone you didn't know             
                                            before-                             
                                                                                
                                            A casual acquaintance-              
                                                                                
                                            or                                  
                                                                                
                                            Someone you know well?              
                                                                                
                                           Did any incidents of this type       
                                           happen to you?                       
                                                                                
                                            1    Yes                            
                                            2    No                             
                                            3    Refused                        
                                            8    Residue                        
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V163 43c  546    86  2-4      261-263 How many times?                      
                                            000-996   Number of times           
                                            998       Residue                   
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V164 44a  547    87  1        264-264 Did you call the police during the   
                                           last 6 months to report something    
                                           (else) that happened to you which    
                                           you thought was a crime?  (Other     
                                           than any incidents already           
                                           mentioned.)                          
                                            1    Yes                            
                                            2    No                             
                                            3    Refused                        
                                            8    Residue                        
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V165 44a  548    87  2-3      265-266 First Incident                       
                                               11   Rape                        
                                                                               
    Page 36                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               12   Attempted rape              
                                               13   Robbery                     
                                               14   Attempted robbery           
                                               15   Assault                     
                                               16   Attempted assault           
                                                    (Threatened Assault)        
                                               17   Burglary                    
                                               18   Attempted burglary          
                                               19   Larceny (Household or       
                                                    Personal)                   
                                               20   Attempted Larceny           
                                                    (Household or Personal)     
                                               21   Motor Vehicle Theft         
                                               22   Attempted Motor Vehicle     
                                                    Theft                       
                                               23   Motor vehicle accident      
                                               24   Vandalism (Against          
                                                    Household or Household      
                                                    Member's Property)          
                                               25   Prowlers/Peeping Toms       
                                               26   Crime Against Household     
                                                    Other Than Any of the       
                                                    Above                       
                                               27   Not a Crime                 
                                               28   Crime Against Someone       
                                                    Else or Society             
                                               29   Unable to Classify          
                                               98   Residue                     
                                               99   Blank                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V166             87  4        267-268 Second Incident                      
                      88  1                    11   Rape                        
                                               12   Attempted rape              
                                               13   Robbery                     
                                               14   Attempted robbery           
                                               15   Assault                     
                                               16   Attempted assault           
                                                    (Threatened Assault)        
                                               17   Burglary                    
                                               18   Attempted burglary          
                                               19   Larceny (Household or       
                                                    Personal)                   
                                               20   Attempted Larceny           
                                                    (Household or Personal)     
                                               21   Motor Vehicle Theft         
                                               22   Attempted Motor Vehicle     
                                                    Theft                       
                                               23   Motor vehicle accident      
                                               24   Vandalism (Against          
                                                    Household or Household      
                                                    Member's Property)          
                                               25   Prowlers/Peeping Toms       
                                               26   Crime Against Household     
                                                    Other Than Any of the       
                                                    Above                       
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 37    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               27   Not a Crime                 
                                               28   Crime Against Someone       
                                                    Else or Society             
                                               29   Unable to Classify          
                                               98   Residue                     
                                               99   Blank                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V167             88  2-3      269-270 Third Incident                       
                                               11   Rape                        
                                               12   Attempted rape              
                                               13   Robbery                     
                                               14   Attempted robbery           
                                               15   Assault                     
                                               16   Attempted assault           
                                                    (Threatened Assault)        
                                               17   Burglary                    
                                               18   Attempted burglary          
                                               19   Larceny (Household or       
                                                    Personal)                   
                                               20   Attempted Larceny           
                                                    (Household or Personal)     
                                               21   Motor Vehicle Theft         
                                               22   Attempted Motor Vehicle     
                                                    Theft                       
                                               23   Motor vehicle accident      
                                               24   Vandalism (Against          
                                                    Household or Household      
                                                    Member's Property)          
                                               25   Prowlers/Peeping Toms       
                                               26   Crime Against Household     
                                                    Other Than Any of the       
                                                    Above                       
                                               27   Not a Crime                 
                                               28   Crime Against Someone       
                                                    Else or Society             
                                               29   Unable to Classify          
                                               98   Residue                     
                                               99   Blank                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V168 Check 549   88  4        271-271 Were you (was the respondent)        
          Item B                           attacked or threatened or was        
                                           something stolen or an attempt made  
                                           to steal something that belonged to  
                                           you (the respondent) or another      
                                           household member?                    
                                            1    Yes                            
                                            2    No                             
                                            3    Refused                        
                                            8    Residue                        
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V169 44b  550    89  1-3      272-274 How many times?                      
                                            000-996   Number of times           
                                            998       Residue                   
                                                                               
    Page 38                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V170 45a  551    89  4        275-275 Did anything happen to you during    
                                           the last 6 months which you thought  
                                           was a crime, but did not report to   
                                           the police?  (Other than any         
                                           incidents already mentioned.)        
                                            1    Yes                            
                                            2    No                             
                                            3    Refused                        
                                            8    Residue                        
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V171 45a  552    90  1-2      276-277 First Incident                       
                                               11   Rape                        
                                               12   Attempted rape              
                                               13   Robbery                     
                                               14   Attempted robbery           
                                               15   Assault                     
                                               16   Attempted assault           
                                                    (Threatened Assault)        
                                               17   Burglary                    
                                               18   Attempted burglary          
                                               19   Larceny (Household or       
                                                    Personal)                   
                                               20   Attempted Larceny           
                                                    (Household or Personal)     
                                               21   Motor Vehicle Theft         
                                               22   Attempted Motor Vehicle     
                                                    Theft                       
                                               23   Motor vehicle accident      
                                               24   Vandalism (Against          
                                                    Household or Household      
                                                    Member's Property)          
                                               25   Prowlers/Peeping Toms       
                                               26   Crime Against Household     
                                                    Other Than Any of the       
                                                    Above                       
                                               27   Not a Crime                 
                                               28   Crime Against Someone       
                                                    Else or Society             
                                               29   Unable to Classify          
                                               98   Residue                     
                                               99   Blank                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V172             90  3-4      278-279 Second Incident                      
                                               11   Rape                        
                                               12   Attempted rape              
                                               13   Robbery                     
                                               14   Attempted robbery           
                                               15   Assault                     
                                               16   Attempted assault           
                                                    (Threatened Assault)        
                                               17   Burglary                    
                                               18   Attempted burglary          
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 39    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               19   Larceny (Household or       
                                                    Personal)                   
                                               20   Attempted Larceny           
                                                    (Household or Personal)     
                                               21   Motor Vehicle Theft         
                                               22   Attempted Motor Vehicle     
                                                    Theft                       
                                               23   Motor vehicle accident      
                                               24   Vandalism (Against          
                                                    Household or Household      
                                                    Member's Property)          
                                               25   Prowlers/Peeping Toms       
                                               26   Crime Against Household     
                                                    Other Than Any of the       
                                                    Above                       
                                               27   Not a Crime                 
                                               28   Crime Against Someone       
                                                    Else or Society             
                                               29   Unable to Classify          
                                               98   Residue                     
                                               99   Blank                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V173             91  1-2      280-281 Third Incident                       
                                               11   Rape                        
                                               12   Attempted rape              
                                               13   Robbery                     
                                               14   Attempted robbery           
                                               15   Assault                     
                                               16   Attempted assault           
                                                    (Threatened Assault)        
                                               17   Burglary                    
                                               18   Attempted burglary          
                                               19   Larceny (Household or       
                                                    Personal)                   
                                               20   Attempted Larceny           
                                                    (Household or Personal)     
                                               21   Motor Vehicle Theft         
                                               22   Attempted Motor Vehicle     
                                                    Theft                       
                                               23   Motor vehicle accident      
                                               24   Vandalism (Against          
                                                    Household or Household      
                                                    Member's Property)          
                                               25   Prowlers/Peeping Toms       
                                               26   Crime Against Household     
                                                    Other Than Any of the       
                                                    Above                       
                                               27   Not a Crime                 
                                               28   Crime Against Someone       
                                                    Else or Society             
                                               29   Unable to Classify          
                                               98   Residue                     
                                               99   Blank                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                               
    Page 40                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V174 Check 553   91  3        282-282 Were you (was the respondent)        
          Item C                           attacked or threatened or was        
                                           something stolen or an attempt made  
                                           to steal something that belonged to  
                                           you (the respondent) or another      
                                           household member?                    
                                            1    Yes                            
                                            2    No                             
                                            3    Refused                        
                                            8    Residue                        
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V175 45b   554   91  4        283-285 How many times?                      
                      92  1-2              000-996   Number of times            
                                               998   Residue                    
                                                                                
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 41    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V176 Check 555                        Who besides the respondent was       
          Item D                           present when screen questions were   
                                           asked?                               
                                                                                
                      92  3        286-286 Lead-in code                         
                                                                                
                                               1    At least one good entry in  
                                                    one or more of the          
                                                    answer category codes       
                                                    1-8.                        
                                                                                
                                               7    Indicates "Personal         
                                                    Interview NA".  The         
                                                    category codes are equal    
                                                    to 0 and the residue code   
                                                    is equal to 8 for this case.
                                                                                
                                               8    No good entry (out of       
                                                    range) in any of the        
                                                    answer category codes       
                                                    1-8.                        
                                                                                
                                           Category codes                       
                                                                                
                                               1    Indicates an entry in the   
                                                    following category          
                                                    positions.                  
                                                                                
                                               0    Indicates no entry in the   
                                                    following category          
                                                    positions.                  
                                               8    Indicates an "NA" when      
                                                    ALL of the following        
                                                    category positions are      
                                                    blank.                      
                                               __________                       
     V177             92  4        287-287     1    Telephone interview         
                                                                                
     V178             93  1        288-288     2    No one besides              
                                                    respondent present          
                                                                                
     V179                 2        289-289     3    Respondent's spouse         
                                                                                
     V180                 3        290-290     4    Household member(s)         
                                                    12+, not spouse             
                                                                                
     V181                 4        291-291     5    Household member(s)         
                                                    under 12                    
                                                                                
     V182             94  1        292-292     6    Nonhousehold member(s)      
                                                                                
     V183                 2        293-293     7    Someone was present -       
                                                    can't say who               
                                                                                
                                                                               
    Page 42                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V184                 3        294-294     8    Don't know if someone       
                                                    else was present            
                                                                                
     V185                 4        295-295    Residue Codes                     
                                                                                
                                               0    The item contains no out    
                                                    of range entries            
                                                                                
                                               8    The item contains one or    
                                                    more out of range entries   
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V186 Check 556   95  1        296-296 Did the person for whom this         
          Item E                           interview was taken help the proxy   
                                           respondent answer any screen         
                                           questions?                           
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Person for whom             
                                                    interview taken not         
                                                    present                     
                                               8    Residue                     
                                               9    Blank - Self-response       
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V187 47a  564    95  2        297-297 Did you have a job or work at a      
                                           business last week?  (Do not include 
                                           volunteer work or work around the    
                                           house.)                              
                                            1    Yes                            
                                            2    No                             
                                            8    Residue                        
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V188 47b  565    95  3        298-298 Did you have a job or work at a      
                                           business during the last 6 months?   
                                            1    Yes                            
                                            2    No                             
                                            8    Residue                        
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V189 47c  566    95  4        299-299 Did that (job/work) last 2           
                                           consecutive weeks or more?           
                                            1    Yes                            
                                            2    No                             
                                            8    Residue                        
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V190 48a  567    96  1-2      300-301 Which of the following best          
                                           describes your job?                  
                                                                                
                                            Medical Profession - As a -         
                                               01   Physician                   
                                               02   Nurse                       
                                               03   Technician                  
                                               04   Other                       
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 43    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               Mental Health Services Field -   
                                               Are your duties -                
                                               05   Professional (Social        
                                                    worker/psychiatrist)        
                                               06   Custodial care              
                                               07   Other                       
                                                                                
                                               Teaching Profession - Were       
                                               you employed in a -              
                                               08   Preschool                   
                                               09   Elementary                  
                                               10   Junior high or middle       
                                                    school                      
                                               11   High School                 
                                               12   College or university       
                                               13   Technical or industrial     
                                                    school                      
                                               14   Special education facility  
                                               15   Other                       
                                                                                
                                               Law Enforcement or Security      
                                               Field - Were you employed as     
                                               a -                              
                                               16   Law enforcement officer     
                                               17   Prison or jail guard        
                                               18   Security guard              
                                               19   Other                       
                                               Retail Sales - Were you employed 
                                               as a -                           
                                               20   Convenience or liquor store 
                                                    clerk                       
                                               21   Gas station attendant       
                                               22   Bartender                   
                                               23   Other                       
                                                                                
                                               Transportation Field - Were you  
                                               employed as a -                  
                                               24   Bus driver                  
                                               25   Taxi cab driver             
                                               26   Other                       
                                               OR                               
                                               27   Something Else              
                                               98   Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V191 48b  568    96  3        302-302 Is your job with -                   
                                               1    A private company,          
                                                    business, or individual for 
                                                    wages                       
                                               2    The Federal government      
                                               3    A State, county, or local   
                                                    government                  
                                               4    Yourself, (Self-employed)   
                                                    in your own business,       
                                                    professional practice, or   
                                                                               
    Page 44                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                    farm                        
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V192 48d  570    96  4        303-303 While working at your job, do you    
                                           work mostly in -                     
                                               1    A city                      
                                               2    Suburban area               
                                               3    Rural area                  
                                               4    Combination of any of these 
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V193      HR     97  1        304-304 Household Respondent                 
               FLAG                            0    Not hhld respondent         
                                               1    Household respondent        
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V194 48c  569    97  2        305-305 Are you employed by a college or     
                                           university?                          
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V195 26   411    97  3        306-306 Attending college                    
                                               1    College/University          
                                               2    Trade school                
                                               3    Vocational school           
                                               4    Not at all                  
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V196      SCS    102 1-4      307-316 SCS Person Weight                    
             WEIGHT   103 1-4                                                   
          (continuing 104 1-4              This weighting factor to be used     
          rotations                        when restricting analysis to         
          only)                            continuing rotations only.           
                                                                                
                                           This weighting factor contains five  
                                           implied decimal places.              
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                           This weighting factor will contain   
                                           all zeros for noninterview persons.  
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V197      NUM    105 1-2      317-317 Number of crime incident reports     
           INCIDENTS                       filled                               
                                               00-18     Number                 
                                               98        Residue                
                                                                                
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 45    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                  SCS SECTION                                   
                                  -----------                                   
               SOURCE                                                           
     VAR ITEM  CODE  WORD DIGIT  CHARACTER   ITEM & CODES                       
     ____________________________________________________________               
                                                                                
     V198 A    002    106 1-2      318-319 Line Number                          
                                               01-96     Actual line number     
                                                  98     Residue                
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V199 B    003    106 3-4      320-321 Age                                  
                                               12-19     Actual age             
                                                  98     Residue                
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V200 C    004    107 1        322-322 Type of Interview                    
                                               1    Personal  - Self            
                                               2    Telephone - Self            
                                               3    Personal - Proxy            
                                               4    Telephone - Proxy           
                                               5    Noninterview                
                                               6    Noninterview created        
                                               7    Type of interview           
                                                    unknown                     
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V201 D    005    107 2        323-323 Reason for SCS Noninterview          
                                               1    NCS Noninterview            
                                               2    SCS Noninterview -          
                                                    Refused                     
                                               3    SCS Noninterview -          
                                                    Not available               
                                               4    SCS Noninterview -          
                                                    Physically or mentally      
                                                    unable and no proxy         
                                                    available                   
                                               5    Unknown reason              
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V202 1    006    107 3        324-324 Did you attend school at any time    
                                           during the last six months, that is, 
                                           any time since........ 1st?          
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V203 2    007    107 4        325-326 What grade are you in school?        
                      108 1                    01   Sixth                       
                                               02   Seventh                     
                                               03   Eighth                      
                                               04   Ninth                       
                                                                               
    Page 46                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               05   Tenth                       
                                               06   Eleventh                    
                                               07   Twelfth                     
                                               08   Other                       
                                               09   College/GED/Other           
                                                    noneligible                 
                                               10   Home School                 
                                               98   Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V204 3    008    108 2        327-327 In what month did your current       
                                           school year begin?                   
                                               1    August                      
                                               2    September                   
                                               3    Other                       
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V205 4    009    108 3        328-328 Did you attend school for all of the 
                                           last six months?                     
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V206 5    010    108 4        329-329 How many months were you in          
                                           school during the last six months?   
                                               1    One month                   
                                               2    Two months                  
                                               3    Three months                
                                               4    Four months                 
                                               5    Five months                 
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V207 7a   014    113 4        330-330 Is your school public or private?    
                                               1    Public                      
                                               2    Private                     
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V208 7b   015    114 1        331-331 Is this your regularly assigned      
                                           school or a school that you or your  
                                           family chose?                        
                                               1    Assigned                    
                                               2    Chose                       
                                               3    Assigned school is school   
                                                    of choice                   
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V209 7c   016    114 2        332-332 Is the school church-related?        
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Don't know                  
                                               4    Don't know if code 1        
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 47    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                    or 3                        
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V210 7d   017    114 3        333-333 Is the school Catholic?              
                                               1    Yes, Catholic               
                                               2    No, other religion          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V211 8    018    114 4        334-335 What grades are taught in your       
                      115 1                school?  (lowest)                    
                                               00-11     Actual grades taught   
                                               12        H.S. Senior            
                                               13        Post-graduate          
                                               20        All ungraded           
                                               30        All Special            
                                                         Education              
                                               98        Residue                
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V212 8    019    115 2-3      336-337 What grades are taught in your       
                                           school?  (highest)                   
                                               00-11     Actual grades taught   
                                               12        H.S. Senior            
                                               13        Post-graduate          
                                               20        All ungraded           
                                               30        All Special            
                                                         Education              
                                               98        Residue                
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V213 9    020    115 4        338-338 How do you get to school most of     
                                           the time?                            
                                               1    Walk                        
                                               2    School bus                  
                                               3    Public bus, subway, train   
                                               4    Car                         
                                               5    Bicycle, motorbike, or      
                                                    motorcycle                  
                                               6    Some other way - specify    
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V214 10   021    116 1         339-339 How long does it take you to get    
                                            from your home to school most of    
                                            the time?                           
                                               1    Less than 15 minutes        
                                               2    15 - 29 minutes             
                                               3    30 - 44 minutes             
                                               4    45 - 59 minutes             
                                               5    60 minutes or longer        
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V215 11   022    116 2        340-340 How do you get home from school      
                                                                               
    Page 48                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                           most of the time?                    
                                               1    Walk                        
                                               2    School bus                  
                                               3    Public bus, subway, train   
                                               4    Car                         
                                               5    Bicycle, motorbike, or      
                                                    motorcycle                  
                                               6    Some other way - Specify    
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V216 12a  023    116 3        341-341 Are most students at your school     
                                           allowed to leave the school grounds  
                                           to eat lunch?                        
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Don't know                  
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V217 12b  024    116 4        342-342 How often do you leave school        
                                           grounds to eat lunch?                
                                               1    Never                       
                                               2    Once or twice a year        
                                               3    Once or twice a month       
                                               4    Once or twice a week        
                                               5    Almost every day            
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V218 13   025    117 1        343-343 In the past six months, have you     
                                           participated in any extra-curricular 
                                           school activities?                   
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V219 14   026    117 2        344-344 Do you spend most of the school      
                                           day in the same classroom?           
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
          15 027-032  117 3-4              Does your school take any particular 
                      118 1-4              measures to ensure the safety of     
                                           students?  For example, does the     
                                           school have:                         
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V220      027    117 3        345-345 a.  Security guards?                 
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 49    
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V221      028    117 4        346-346 b.  Other school staff supervising   
                                               the hallway?                     
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V222      029    118 1        347-347 c.  Metal detectors?                 
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V223      030    118 2        348-348 d.  Locked doors during the day?     
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V224      031    118 3        349-349 e.  A requirement that visitors      
                                               sign in?                         
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V225      032    118 4        350-350 f.  Locker checks?                   
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
          16 033-037 119 1-4               I am going to read a list of         
                     120 1                 statements that could describe a     
                                           school.  Thinking about your school  
                                           over the past six months, would you  
                                           strongly agree, agree, disagree, or  
                                           strongly disagree with the           
                                           following...                         
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V226     033    119 1         351-351 a.  Everyone knows what the          
                                               school rules are                 
                                               1    Strongly Agree              
                                               2    Agree                       
                                               3    Disagree                    
                                               4    Strongly Disagree           
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V227      034    119 2        352-352 b.  The school rules are fair        
                                               1    Strongly Agree              
                                               2    Agree                       
                                               3    Disagree                    
                                               4    Strongly Disagree           
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                               
    Page 50                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V228      035    119 3        353-353 c.  The punishment for breaking      
                                               school rules is the same no      
                                               matter who you are               
                                               1    Strongly Agree              
                                               2    Agree                       
                                               3    Disagree                    
                                               4    Strongly Disagree           
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V229      036    119 4        354-354 d.  The school rules are strictly    
                                               enforced                         
                                               1    Strongly Agree              
                                               2    Agree                       
                                               3    Disagree                    
                                               4    Strongly Disagree           
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V230      037    120 1        355-355 e.  If a school rule is broken,      
                                               students know what kind of       
                                               punishment will follow           
                                               1    Strongly Agree              
                                               2    Agree                       
                                               3    Disagree                    
                                               4    Strongly Disagree           
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V231 17   038    120 2        356-356 Have you attended any drug           
                                           education classes in your school     
                                           during the last six months, that is, 
                                           since...........1st?                 
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Don't know                  
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
          18 039-047  120 3-4              The following question refers to the 
                      121 1-4              availability of drugs and alcohol in 
                      122 1-3              school.  Tell me if you don't know   
                                           what any of these items are.  How    
                                           easy or hard is it for someone to get
                                           the following things at your school? 
                                           Is it easy, hard, or impossible to   
                                           get at your school?                  
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V232      039    120 3        357-357 a.  Alcoholic beverages              
                                               1    Easy                        
                                               2    Hard                        
                                               3    Impossible                  
                                               4    DK                          
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 51    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               5    DK Drug                     
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V233      040    120 4        358-358 b.  Marijuana                        
                                               1    Easy                        
                                               2    Hard                        
                                               3    Impossible                  
                                               4    DK                          
                                               5    DK Drug                     
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V234      041    121 1        359-359 c.  Crack                            
                                               1    Easy                        
                                               2    Hard                        
                                               3    Impossible                  
                                               4    DK                          
                                               5    DK Drug                     
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V235      042    121 2        360-360 d.  Other forms of cocaine           
                                               1    Easy                        
                                               2    Hard                        
                                               3    Impossible                  
                                               4    DK                          
                                               5    DK Drug                     
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V236      043    121 3        361-361 e.  Uppers/downers                   
                                               1    Easy                        
                                               2    Hard                        
                                               3    Impossible                  
                                               4    DK                          
                                               5    DK Drug                     
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V237      044    121 4        362-362 f.  LSD                              
                                               1    Easy                        
                                               2    Hard                        
                                               3    Impossible                  
                                               4    DK                          
                                               5    DK Drug                     
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V238      045    122 1        363-363 g.  PCP                              
                                               1    Easy                        
                                               2    Hard                        
                                               3    Impossible                  
                                               4    DK                          
                                               5    DK Drug                     
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                               
    Page 52                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V239      046    122 2        364-364 h.  Heroin                           
                                               1    Easy                        
                                               2    Hard                        
                                               3    Impossible                  
                                               4    DK                          
                                               5    DK Drug                     
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V240      047    122 3        365-365 i.  Other illegal drugs              
                                               1    Easy                        
                                               2    Hard                        
                                               3    Impossible                  
                                               4    DK                          
                                               5    DK Drug                     
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V241 19   048    122 4        366-366 Are there any street gangs at your   
                                           school?                              
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Don't know                  
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V242 20a  049    123 1        367-367 During the past six months, that is, 
                                           since...............1st, did anyone  
                                           take money or things DIRECTLY        
                                           FROM YOU by force, weapons, or       
                                           threats at school?                   
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V243 20b  050    123 2-4      368-370 How many times did this happen       
                                           during the last six months?          
                                               001-996   Actual number of       
                                                         times                  
                                               998  Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V244 20c  051    124 1-3      371-373 How many of these times was your     
                                           total loss worth more than $10?      
                                               000       None                   
                                               001-996   Actual number of       
                                                         times                  
                                               998       Residue                
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V245 21a  052    124 4        374-374 During the last six months, did      
                                           anyone steal something from your     
                                           desk, locker, or some other place at 
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 53    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                           school, (other than any incidents    
                                           just mentioned?                      
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V246 21b  053    125 1-3      375-377 How many times did this happen       
                                           during the last six months?          
                                               001-996   Actual number of       
                                                         times                  
                                               998  Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V247      054    125 4        378-380 How many of these times was your     
                      126 1-2              total loss worth more than $10?      
                                               000       None                   
                                               001-996   Actual number of       
                                                         times                  
                                               998       Residue                
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V248 2    055    126 3        381-381 (Other than the incidents just       
                                           mentioned,) did anyone physically    
                                           attack you at school during the last 
                                           six months?                          
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V249 22b  056   126 4         382-384 How many times did this happen?      
                     127 1-2                   001-996   Actual number of       
                                                         times                  
                                               998  Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V250 22c  057   127 3         385-385 Did you go to a doctor as a result   
                                           of (this/any of these) attack(s)?    
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V251 22d  058   127 4         386-388 How many times did you receive       
                     128 1-2               injuries in any of these attacks at  
                                           school that led to a visit to the    
                                           doctor?                              
                                               001-996   Actual number of       
                                                         times                  
                                               998       Residue                
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V252 22e  059   128 3-4       389-391 (1)  Was that incident an attack or  
                     129 1                      just a fight?                   
                                           (2)  How many of these attacks       
                                                                               
    Page 54                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                were just fights?               
                                                                                
                                               000       None                   
                                               001-996   Actual number of       
                                                         times                  
                                               998       Residue                
                                                                                
                                                                                
          23a 060-067 129 2-4              Did you STAY AWAY from any of        
                      130 1-4              the following places because you     
                      131 1                thought someone might attack or      
                                           harm you there?                      
                                                                                
     V253      060    129 2        392-392 1.  The shortest route to school?    
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V254      061    129 3        393-393 2.  The entrance into the school?    
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V255      062    129 4        394-394 3.  Any hallways or stairs in        
                                               school?                          
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V256      063    130 1        395-395 4.  Parts of the school cafeteria?   
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V257      064    130 2        396-396 5.  Any school restrooms?            
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V258      065    130 3        397-397 6.  Other places inside the school   
                                               building?                        
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V259      066    130 4        398-398 7.  School parking lot?              
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 55    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V260      067    131 1        399-399 8.  Other places on school           
                                               grounds?                         
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V261 23b  068    131 2                Did you AVOID extra-curricular       
                                           activities at your school because    
                                           you thought someone might attack or  
                                           harm you?                            
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V262 24   069    131 3        401-401 How often are you afraid that        
                                           someone will attack or harm you at   
                                           school?                              
                                               1    Never                       
                                               2    Almost never                
                                               3    Sometimes                   
                                               4    Most of the time            
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V263 25   070    131 4        403-403 How often are you afraid that        
                                           someone will attack or harm you on   
                                           the way to and from school?          
                                               1    Never                       
                                               2    Almost never                
                                               3    Sometimes                   
                                               4    Most of the time            
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V264 26   071    132 1        403-403 During the last six months how       
                                           often did you bring something to     
                                           school to protect yourself from      
                                           being attacked or harmed?            
                                               1    Never                       
                                               2    Almost never                
                                               3    Sometimes                   
                                               4    Most of the time            
                                               5    Don't know how often        
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
          27a 072-076 132 2-4              Did you bring any of the following   
                      133 1-2              to school to protect yourself from   
                                           being attacked?                      
                                                                                
     V265      072    132 2        404-404 1.  Mace or pepper spray             
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                                                               
    Page 56                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V266      073    132 3        405-405 2.  Stick, club, or bat              
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V267      074    132 4        406-406 3.  Knife                            
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V268      075    133 1        407-407 4.  Gun                              
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V269      076    133 2        408-408 5.  Something else                   
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Not known                   
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V270 27b  077    133 3        409-409 Do you know any other students       
                                           who have brought a gun to your       
                                           school in the last six months?       
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V271 27c  078    133 4        410-410 Have you actually seen another       
                                           student with a gun at school in      
                                           the last six months?                 
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Don't know                  
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V272 28   079    134 1        411-411 Do any of the students at your       
                                           school belong to a street gang?      
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Don't know                  
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V273 29   080    134 2        412-412 What about gangs that don't have     
                                           members attending your               
                                           school...have any of those gangs     
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 57    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                           come around your school in the past  
                                           six months?                          
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Don't know                  
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
          30 081-088  134 3-4              How do you know street gangs         
                      135 1-4              exist?  Do gangs or gang members:    
                      136 1-2                                                   
                                                                                
     V274      081    134 3        413-413 a.  Have a name?                     
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Don't know                  
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V275      082    134 4        414-414 b.  Have a recognized leader?        
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Don't know                  
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V276      083    135 1        415-415 c.  Have their own territory or      
                                               turf?                            
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Don't know                  
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V277      084    135 2        416-416 d.  Tag or mark turf with graffiti?  
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Don't know                  
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V278      085    135 3        417-417 e.  Commit violent acts?             
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Don't know                  
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V279      086    135 4        418-418 f.  Spend time with other            
                                               members of the gang?             
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Don't know                  
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                               
    Page 58                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V280      087    136 1        419-419 g.  Wear clothing or other items     
                                               to identify their gang           
                                               membership?                      
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Don't know                  
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V281      088    136 2        420-420 h.  Have tatoos?                     
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Don't know                  
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V282 31   089    136 3        421-421 How often have street gangs been     
                                           involved in fights, attacks or       
                                           violence at your school in the past  
                                           six months?                          
                                               1    Never                       
                                               2    Once or twice in the six    
                                                    months                      
                                               3    Once or twice a month       
                                               4    Once or twice a week, or    
                                               5    Almost every day?           
                                               6    Don't know                  
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V283 32   090    136 4        422-422 Have street gangs been involved in   
                                           the sale of drugs at your school in  
                                           the past six months?                 
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Don't know                  
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V284 33   091    137 1        423-423 Have any street gang members         
                                           brought guns to your school in the   
                                           past six months?                     
                                               1    Yes                         
                                               2    No                          
                                               3    Don't know                  
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V285 CIC  092    137 2        424-424 Was an adult member of the           
                                           household or family present during   
                                           at least part of the questions?      
                                               1    Personal interview-No       
                                                    adult present               
                                               2    Personal interview-Adult    
                                                    present                     
                                               3    Telephone interview-No      
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 59    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                    adult present               
                                               4    Telephone interview-Adult   
                                                    present                     
                                               5    Telephone interview-Don't   
                                                    know                        
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V286     SCS     139 1-4      425-434 SCS Person Weight                    
             PERSON   140 1-4                                                   
             WEIGHT   141 1-4              This weighting factor to be used     
           (incoming &                     when analysis includes both the      
           continuing                      incoming and continuing rotations.   
           rotations)                      This weighting factor contains five  
                                           implied decimal places.              
                                                                                
                                           This weighting factor will contain   
                                           all zeros for noninterview SCS       
                                           persons.                             
                                                                                
                                                                               
    Page 60                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                             NCVS INCIDENT SECTION                              
                             ---------------------                              
                                                                                
                            INCIDENT 1 (V287-V291)                              
                            ----------------------                              
                                                                                
               SOURCE                                                           
     VAR ITEM  CODE  WORD DIGIT   CHARACTER   ITEM & CODES                      
     ____________________________________________________________               
                                                                                
     V287      TOC    142 1-2      435-436 Type of Crime Code (OLD)             
               CODE                           Violent Crimes                    
               (OLD)                           01   Completed Rape              
                                               02   Attempted Rape              
                                               03   Sexual Attack with          
                                                    Serious Assault             
                                               04   Sexual Attack with Minor    
                                                    Assault                     
                                               05   Completed Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Serious         
                                                    Assault                     
                                               06   Completed Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Minor           
                                                    Assault                     
                                               07   Completed Robbery           
                                                    without Injury              
                                               08   Attempted Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Serious         
                                                    Assault                     
                                               09   Attempted Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Minor           
                                                    Assault                     
                                               10   Attempted Robbery           
                                                    without Injury              
                                               11   Completed Aggravated        
                                                    Assault with Injury         
                                               12   Attempted Aggravated        
                                                    Assault with Weapon         
                                               13   Threatened Assault with     
                                                    Weapon                      
                                               14   Simple Assault              
                                                    Completed with Injury       
                                               15   Sexual Assault without      
                                                    Injury                      
                                               16   Unwanted Sexual Contact     
                                                    without Force               
                                               17   Assault without Weapon      
                                                    without Injury              
                                               18   Verbal Threat of Rape       
                                               19   Verbal Threat of Sexual     
                                                    Assault                     
                                               20   Verbal Threat of Assault    
                                               90   Unwanted Sexual Contact     
                                                                                
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 61    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                          Personal Theft                        
                                               21   Completed Purse             
                                                    Snatching                   
                                               22   Attempted Purse             
                                                    Snatching                   
                                               23   Pocket Picking              
                                                    (completed only)            
                                               24   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    Less than $10               
                                               25   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    $10 to $49                  
                                               26   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    $0 to $249                  
                                               27   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    $250 or greater             
                                               28   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    Value NA                    
                                               29   Attempted Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                                                
                                          Property Crimes                       
                                               31   Completed Burglary,         
                                                    Forcible Entry              
                                               32   Completed Burglary,         
                                                    Unlawful Entry without      
                                                    Force                       
                                               33   Attempted Forcible Entry    
                                               34   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny Less than $10       
                                               35   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny $10 to $49          
                                               36   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny $50 to $249         
                                               37   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny $250 or Greater     
                                               38   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny Value NA            
                                               39   Attempted Household         
                                                    Larceny                     
                                               40   Completed Motor Vehicle     
                                                    Theft                       
                                               41   Attempted Motor Vehicle     
                                                    Theft                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V288 CHECK 610   142 3        437-437 Can you (respondent) recall enough   
          ITEM D                           details of each incident to          
                                           distinguish from each other?         
                                               1    Yes (not a "series")        
                                               2    No (is a "series")          
                                                                               
    Page 62                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V289 6    612    142 4        438-438 About what time did (this/the most   
                                           recent) incident happen?             
                                               During day                       
                                               1    After 6 a.m.-12 noon        
                                               2    After 12 noon-6 p.m.        
                                               3    Don't know what time of     
                                                    day                         
                                               At night                         
                                               4    After 6 p.m.-12 midnight    
                                               5    After 12 midnight-6 a.m.    
                                               6    Don't know what time of     
                                                    night                       
                                               or                               
                                               7    Don't know whether day      
                                                    or night                    
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V290 7    613    143 1        439-439 In what city, town, or village did   
                                           this incident occur?                 
                                               1    Outside U.S.                
                                               2    Not inside a                
                                                    city/town/village           
                                               3    SAME city/town/village      
                                                    as present residence        
                                               4    DIFFERENT                   
                                                    city/town/village from      
                                                    present residence-Specify   
                                               5    Don't know                  
                                               6    Don't know if code 2, 4,    
                                                    or 5                        
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V291 10   616    143 2-3      440-441 Where did this incident happen?      
                                                                                
                                               IN RESPONDENT'S HOME             
                                               OR LODGING                       
                                               01   In own dwelling, own        
                                                    attached garage, or         
                                                    enclosed porch              
                                               02   In detached building on     
                                                    own property, such as       
                                                    detached garage, storage    
                                                    shed, etc.                  
                                               03   In vacation home/second     
                                                    home                        
                                               04   In hotel or motel room      
                                                    respondent was staying in   
                                                                                
                                               NEAR OWN HOME                    
                                               05   Own yard, sidewalk,         
                                                    driveway, carport,          
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 63    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                    unenclosed porch            
                                               06   Apartment hall, storage     
                                                    area, laundry room          
                                               07   On street immediately       
                                                    adjacent to own home        
                                                                                
                                               AT, IN, OR NEAR A                
                                               FRIEND'S/RELATIVE'S/             
                                               NEIGHBOR'S HOME                  
                                               08   At or in home or other      
                                                    building on their property  
                                               09   Yard, sidewalk,             
                                                    driveway, carport           
                                               10   Apartment hall, storage     
                                                    area, laundry room          
                                               11   On street immediately       
                                                    adjacent to their home      
                                                                                
                                               COMMERCIAL PLACES                
                                               12   Inside restaurant, bar,     
                                                    nightclub                   
                                               13   Inside other commercial     
                                                    building such as store,     
                                                    bank, gas station           
                                               14   Inside office, factory, or  
                                                    warehouse                   
                                                                                
                                               PARKING LOTS/GARAGES             
                                               15   Commercial parking          
                                                    lot/garage                  
                                               16   Noncommercial parking       
                                                    lot/garage                  
                                               17   Apartment/townhouse         
                                                    parking lot/garage          
                                                                                
                                               SCHOOL                           
                                               18   Inside school building      
                                               19   On school property          
                                                    (school parking area, play  
                                                    area, school bus, etc.)     
                                                                                
                                               OPEN AREAS, ON STREET            
                                               OR PUBLIC                        
                                               TRANSPORTATION                   
                                               20   In apartment yard, park,    
                                                    field, playground           
                                               21   On the street               
                                               22   On public transportation    
                                                    or in station (bus, train,  
                                                    plane, airport, depot,      
                                                    etc.)                       
                                                                                
                                               OTHER                            
                                               23   Other - Specify             
                                               98   Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                               
    Page 64                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 65    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                            INCIDENT 2 (V292-V296)                              
                            ----------------------                              
                                                                                
     V292      TOC    144 1-2      442-443 Type of Crime Code (OLD)             
               CODE                                                             
               (OLD)                       Violent Crimes                       
                                               01   Completed Rape              
                                               02   Attempted Rape              
                                               03   Sexual Attack with          
                                                    Serious Assault             
                                               04   Sexual Attack with Minor    
                                                    Assault                     
                                               05   Completed Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Serious         
                                                    Assault                     
                                               06   Completed Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Minor           
                                                    Assault                     
                                               07   Completed Robbery           
                                                    without Injury              
                                               08   Attempted Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Serious         
                                                    Assault                     
                                               09   Attempted Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Minor           
                                                    Assault                     
                                               10   Attempted Robbery           
                                                    without Injury              
                                               11   Completed Aggravated        
                                                    Assault with Injury         
                                               12   Attempted Aggravated        
                                                    Assault with Weapon         
                                               13   Threatened Assault with     
                                                    Weapon                      
                                               14   Simple Assault              
                                                    Completed with Injury       
                                               15   Sexual Assault without      
                                                    Injury                      
                                               16   Unwanted Sexual Contact     
                                                    without Force               
                                               17   Assault without Weapon      
                                                    without Injury              
                                               18   Verbal Threat of Rape       
                                               19   Verbal Threat of Sexual     
                                                    Assault                     
                                               20   Verbal Threat of Assault    
                                               90   Unwanter Sexual Contact     
                                                                                
                                           Personal Theft                       
                                               21   Completed Purse             
                                                    Snatching                   
                                               22   Attempted Purse             
                                                    Snatching                   
                                               23   Pocket Picking              
                                                    (completed only)            
                                                                               
    Page 66                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               24   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    Less than $10               
                                               25   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    $10 to $49                  
                                               26   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    $0 to $249                  
                                               27   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    $250 or greater             
                                               28   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    Value NA                    
                                               29   Attempted Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                                                
                                           Property Crimes                      
                                               31   Completed Burglary,         
                                                    Forcible Entry              
                                               32   Completed Burglary,         
                                                    Unlawful Entry without      
                                                    Force                       
                                               33   Attempted Forcible Entry    
                                               34   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny Less than $10       
                                               35   Completed to $49 Property   
                                                    Crime                       
                                               36   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny $50 to $249         
                                               37   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny $250 or Greater     
                                               35   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny $10 to $49          
                                               36   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny $50 to $249         
                                               37   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny $250 or Greater     
                                               38   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny Value NA            
                                               39   Attempted Household         
                                                    Larceny                     
                                               40   Completed Motor Vehicle     
                                                    Theft                       
                                               41   Attempted Motor Vehicle     
                                                    Theft                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V293 CHECK 610   144 3        444-444 Can you (respondent) recall enough   
          ITEM D                           details of each incident to          
                                           distinguish from each other?         
                                               1    Yes (not a "series")        
                                               2    No (is a "series")          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 67    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V294       612   144 4        445-445 About what time did (this/the most   
                                           recent) incident happen?             
                                               During day                       
                                               1    After 6 a.m.-12 noon        
                                               2    After 12 noon-6 p.m.        
                                               3    Don't know what time of     
                                                    day                         
                                               At night                         
                                               4    After 6 p.m.-12 midnight    
                                               5    After 12 midnight-6 a.m.    
                                               6    Don't know what time of     
                                                    night                       
                                               or                               
                                               7    Don't know whether day      
                                                    or night                    
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V295      613    145 1        446-446 In what city, town, or village did   
                                           this incident occur?                 
                                               1    Outside U.S.                
                                               2    Not inside a                
                                                    city/town/village           
                                               3    SAME city/town/village      
                                                    as present residence        
                                               4    DIFFERENT                   
                                                    city/town/village from      
                                                    present residence-Specify   
                                               5    Don't know                  
                                               6    Don't know if 2, 4, or 5    
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V296      616    145 2-3      447-448 Where did this incident happen?      
                                                                                
                                               IN RESPONDENT'S HOME             
                                               OR LODGING                       
                                               01   In own dwelling, own        
                                                    attached garage, or         
                                                    enclosed porch              
                                               02   In detached building on     
                                                    own property, such as       
                                                    detached garage, storage    
                                                    shed, etc.                  
                                               03   In vacation home/second     
                                                    home                        
                                               04   In hotel or motel room      
                                                    respondent was staying in   
                                                                                
                                               NEAR OWN HOME                    
                                               05   Own yard, sidewalk,         
                                                    driveway, carport,          
                                                    unenclosed porch            
                                               06   Apartment hall, storage     
                                                    area, laundry room          
                                                                               
    Page 68                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               07   On street immediately       
                                                    adjacent to own home        
                                                                                
                                               AT, IN, OR NEAR A                
                                               FRIEND'S/RELATIVE'S/             
                                               NEIGHBOR'S HOME                  
                                               08   At or in home or other      
                                                    building on their property  
                                               09   Yard, sidewalk,             
                                                    driveway, carport           
                                               10   Apartment hall, storage     
                                                    area, laundry room          
                                               11   On street immediately       
                                                    adjacent to their home      
                                                                                
                                               COMMERCIAL PLACES                
                                               12   Inside restaurant, bar,     
                                                    nightclub                   
                                               13   Inside other commercial     
                                                    building such as store,     
                                                    bank, gas station           
                                               14   Inside office, factory, or  
                                                    warehouse                   
                                                                                
                                               PARKING LOTS/GARAGES             
                                               15   Commercial parking          
                                                    lot/garage                  
                                               16   Noncommercial parking       
                                                    lot/garage                  
                                               17   Apartment/townhouse         
                                                    parking lot/garage          
                                                                                
                                               SCHOOL                           
                                               18   Inside school building      
                                               19   On school property          
                                                    (school parking area, play  
                                                    area, school bus, etc.)     
                                                                                
                                               OPEN AREAS, ON STREET            
                                               OR PUBLIC                        
                                               TRANSPORTATION                   
                                               20   In apartment yard, park,    
                                                    field, playground           
                                               21   On the street               
                                               22   On public transportation    
                                                    or in station (bus, train,  
                                                    plane, airport, depot,      
                                                    etc.)                       
                                                                                
                                               OTHER                            
                                               23   Other - Specify             
                                               98   Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 69    
                                                                                
                            INCIDENT 3 (V297-V301)                              
                            ----------------------                              
                                                                                
     V297      TOC    146 1-2      449-450 Type of Crime Code (OLD)             
               CODE                                                             
               (OLD)                           Violent Crimes                   
                                               01   Completed Rape              
                                               02   Attempted Rape              
                                               03   Sexual Attack with          
                                                    Serious Assault             
                                               04   Sexual Attack with Minor    
                                                    Assault                     
                                               05   Completed Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Serious         
                                                    Assault                     
                                               06   Completed Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Minor           
                                                    Assault                     
                                               07   Completed Robbery           
                                                    without Injury              
                                               08   Attempted Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Serious         
                                                    Assault                     
                                               09   Attempted Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Minor           
                                                    Assault                     
                                               10   Attempted Robbery           
                                                    without Injury              
                                               11   Completed Aggravated        
                                                    Assault with Injury         
                                               12   Attempted Aggravated        
                                                    Assault with Weapon         
                                               13   Threatened Assault with     
                                                    Weapon                      
                                               14   Simple Assault              
                                                    Completed with Injury       
                                               15   Sexual Assault without      
                                                    Injury                      
                                               16   Unwanted Sexual Contact     
                                                    without Force               
                                               17   Assault without Weapon      
                                                    without Injury              
                                               18   Verbal Threat of Rape       
                                               19   Verbal Threat of Sexual     
                                                    Assault                     
                                               20   Verbal Threat of Assault    
                                               90   Unwanter Sexual Contact     
                                                                                
                                           Personal Theft                       
                                               21   Completed Purse             
                                                    Snatching                   
                                               22   Attempted Purse             
                                                    Snatching                   
                                               23   Pocket Picking              
                                                                               
    Page 70                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                    (completed only)            
                                               24   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    Less than $10               
                                               25   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    $10 to $49                  
                                               26   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    $0 to $249                  
                                               27   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    $250 or greater             
                                               28   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    Value NA                    
                                               29   Attempted Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                                                
                                           Property Crimes                      
                                               31   Completed Burglary,         
                                                    Forcible Entry              
                                               32   Completed Burglary,         
                                                    Unlawful Entry without      
                                                    Force                       
                                               33   Attempted Forcible Entry    
                                               34   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny Less than $10       
                                                                                
                                               35   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny $10 to $49          
                                               36   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny $50 to $249         
                                               37   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny $250 or Greater     
                                               38   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny Value NA            
                                               39   Attempted Household         
                                                    Larceny                     
                                               40   Completed Motor Vehicle     
                                                    Theft                       
                                               41   Attempted Motor Vehicle     
                                                    Theft                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V298 CHECK 610   146 3        451-451 Can you (respondent) recall enough   
          ITEM D                           details of each incident to          
                                           distinguish from each other?         
                                                1    Yes (not a "series")       
                                                2    No (is a "series")         
                                                8    Residue                    
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V299       612   146 4        452-452 About what time did (this/the most   
                                           recent) incident happen?             
                                               During day                       
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 71    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               1    After 6 a.m.-12 noon        
                                               2    After 12 noon-6 p.m.        
                                               3    Don't know what time of     
                                                    day                         
                                               At night                         
                                               4    After 6 p.m.-12 midnight    
                                               5    After 12 midnight-6 a.m.    
                                               6    Don't know what time of     
                                                    night                       
                                               or                               
                                               7    Don't know whether day      
                                                    or night                    
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V300      613    147 1        453-453 In what city, town, or village did   
                                           this incident occur?                 
                                               1    Outside U.S.                
                                               2    Not inside a                
                                                    city/town/village           
                                               3    SAME city/town/village      
                                                    as present residence        
                                               4    DIFFERENT                   
                                                    city/town/village from      
                                                    present residence-Specify   
                                               5    Don't know                  
                                               6    Don't know if 2, 4, or 5    
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V301      616    147 2-3      454-455 Where did this incident happen?      
                                                                                
                                               IN RESPONDENT'S HOME             
                                               OR LODGING                       
                                               01   In own dwelling, own        
                                                    attached garage, or         
                                                    enclosed porch              
                                               02   In detached building on     
                                                    own property, such as       
                                                    detached garage, storage    
                                                    shed, etc.                  
                                               03   In vacation home/second     
                                                    home                        
                                               04   In hotel or motel room      
                                                    respondent was staying in   
                                                                                
                                               NEAR OWN HOME                    
                                               05   Own yard, sidewalk,         
                                                    driveway, carport,          
                                                    unenclosed porch            
                                               06   Apartment hall, storage     
                                                    area, laundry room          
                                               07   On street immediately       
                                                    adjacent to own home        
                                                                                
                                               AT, IN, OR NEAR A                
                                                                               
    Page 72                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               FRIEND'S/RELATIVE'S/             
                                               NEIGHBOR'S HOME                  
                                               08   At or in home or other      
                                                    building on their property  
                                               09   Yard, sidewalk,             
                                                    driveway, carport           
                                               10   Apartment hall, storage     
                                                    area, laundry room          
                                               11   On street immediately       
                                                    adjacent to their home      
                                                                                
                                               COMMERCIAL PLACES                
                                               12   Inside restaurant, bar,     
                                                    nightclub                   
                                               13   Inside other commercial     
                                                    building such as store,     
                                                    bank, gas station           
                                               14   Inside office, factory, or  
                                                    warehouse                   
                                                                                
                                           PARKING LOTS/GARAGES                 
                                               15   Commercial parking          
                                                    lot/garage                  
                                               16   Noncommercial parking       
                                                    lot/garage                  
                                               17   Apartment/townhouse         
                                                    parking lot/garage          
                                                                                
                                           SCHOOL                               
                                               18   Inside school building      
                                               19   On school property          
                                                    (school parking area, play  
                                                    area, school bus, etc.)     
                                                                                
                                           OPEN AREAS, ON STREET OR             
                                           PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION                
                                               20   In apartment yard, park,    
                                                    field, playground           
                                               21   On the street               
                                               22   On public transportation    
                                                    or in station (bus, train,  
                                                    plane, airport, depot,      
                                                    etc.)                       
                                                                                
                                           OTHER                                
                                               23   Other - Specify             
                                               98   Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 73    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                            INCIDENT 4 (V302-V306)                              
                            ----------------------                              
                                                                                
     V302      TOC    148 1-2      456-457 Type of Crime Code (OLD)             
               CODE                                                             
               (OLD)                           Violent Crimes                   
                                               01   Completed Rape              
                                               02   Attempted Rape              
                                               03   Sexual Attack with          
                                                    Serious Assault             
                                               04   Sexual Attack with Minor    
                                                    Assault                     
                                               05   Completed Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Serious         
                                                    Assault                     
                                               06   Completed Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Minor           
                                                    Assault                     
                                               07   Completed Robbery           
                                                    without Injury              
                                               08   Attempted Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Serious         
                                                    Assault                     
                                               09   Attempted Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Minor           
                                                    Assault                     
                                               10   Attempted Robbery           
                                                    without Injury              
                                               11   Completed Aggravated        
                                                    Assault with Injury         
                                               12   Attempted Aggravated        
                                                    Assault with Weapon         
                                               13   Threatened Assault with     
                                                    Weapon                      
                                               14   Simple Assault              
                                                    Completed with Injury       
                                               15   Sexual Assault without      
                                                    Injury                      
                                               16   Unwanted Sexual Contact     
                                                    without Force               
                                               17   Assault without Weapon      
                                                    without Injury              
                                               18   Verbal Threat of Rape       
                                               19   Verbal Threat of Sexual     
                                                    Assault                     
                                               20   Verbal Threat of Assault    
                                               90   Unwanter Sexual Contact     
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                            Personal Theft                      
                                               21   Completed Purse             
                                                    Snatching                   
                                               22   Attempted Purse             
                                                    Snatching                   
                                               23   Pocket Picking              
                                                                               
    Page 74                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                    (completed only)            
                                               24   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    Less than $10               
                                               25   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    $10 to $49                  
                                               26   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    $0 to $249                  
                                               27   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    $250 or greater             
                                               28   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    Value NA                    
                                               29   Attempted Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                               31   Completed Burglary,         
                                                    Forcible Entry              
                                               32   Completed Burglary,         
                                                    Unlawful Entry without      
                                                    Force                       
                                               33   Attempted Forcible Entry    
                                               34   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny Less than $10       
                                               35   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny $10 to $49          
                                               36   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny $50 to $249         
                                               37   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny $250 or Greater     
                                               38   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny Value NA            
                                               39   Attempted Household         
                                                    Larceny                     
                                               40   Completed Motor Vehicle     
                                                    Theft                       
                                               41   Attempted Motor Vehicle     
                                                    Theft                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V303 CHECK 610   148 3        458-458 Can you (respondent) recall enough   
          ITEM D                           Can you (respondent) recall enough   
                                           details of each incident to          
                                           distinguish from each other?         
                                               1    Yes (not a "series")        
                                               2    No (is a "series")          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V304      612    148 4        459-459 About what time did (this/the most   
                                           recent) incident happen?             
                                               During day                       
                                               1    After 6 a.m.-12 noon        
                                               2    After 12 noon-6 p.m.        
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 75    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               3    Don't know what time of     
                                                    day                         
                                               At night                         
                                               4    After 6 p.m.-12 midnight    
                                               5    After 12 midnight-6 a.m.    
                                               6    Don't know what time of     
                                                    night                       
                                               or                               
                                               7    Don't know whether day      
                                                    or night                    
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V305      613    149 1        460-460 In what city, town, or village did   
                                           this incident occur?                 
                                               1    Outside U.S.                
                                               2    Not inside a                
                                                    city/town/village           
                                               3    SAME city/town/village      
                                                    as present residence        
                                               4    DIFFERENT                   
                                                    city/town/village from      
                                                    present residence-Specify   
                                               5    Don't know                  
                                               6    Don't know if 2, 4, or 5    
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V306 10   616    149 2-3      461-462 Where did this incident happen?      
                                                                                
                                               IN RESPONDENT'S HOME             
                                               OR LODGING                       
                                               01   In own dwelling, own        
                                                    attached garage, or         
                                                    enclosed porch              
                                               02   In detached building on     
                                                    own property, such as       
                                                    detached garage, storage    
                                                    shed, etc.                  
                                               03   In vacation home/second     
                                                    home                        
                                               04   In h9otel or motel room     
                                                    respondent was staying in   
                                                                                
                                               NEAR OWN HOME                    
                                               05   Own yard, sidewalk,         
                                                    driveway, carport,          
                                                    unenclosed porch            
                                               06   Apartment hall, storage     
                                                    area, laundry room          
                                               07   On street immediately       
                                                    adjacent to own home        
                                                                                
                                               AT, IN, OR NEAR A                
                                               FRIEND'S/RELATIVE'S/             
                                               NEIGHBOR'S HOME                  
                                                                               
    Page 76                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               08   At or in home or other      
                                                    building on their property  
                                               09   Yard, sidewalk,             
                                                    driveway, carport           
                                               10   Apartment hall, storage     
                                                    area, laundry room          
                                               11   On street immediately       
                                                    adjacent to their home      
                                                                                
                                               COMMERCIAL PLACES                
                                               12   Inside restaurant, bar,     
                                                    nightclub                   
                                               13   Inside other commercial     
                                                    building such as store,     
                                                    bank, gas station           
                                               14   Inside office, factory, or  
                                                    warehouse                   
                                                                                
                                               PARKING LOTS/GARAGES             
                                               15   Commercial parking          
                                                    lot/garage                  
                                               16   Noncommercial parking       
                                                    lot/garage                  
                                               17   Apartment/townhouse         
                                                    parking lot/garage          
                                                                                
                                               SCHOOL                           
                                               18   Inside school building      
                                               19   On school property          
                                                    (school parking area, play  
                                                    area, school bus, etc.)     
                                                                                
                                               OPEN AREAS, ON STREET            
                                               OR PUBLIC                        
                                               TRANSPORTATION                   
                                               20   In apartment yard, park,    
                                                    field, playground           
                                               21   On the street               
                                               22   On public transportation    
                                                    or in station (bus, train,  
                                                    plane, airport, depot,      
                                                    etc.)                       
                                               OTHER                            
                                               23   Other - Specify             
                                               98   Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 77    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                            INCIDENT 5 (V307-V311)                              
                            ----------------------                              
                                                                                
     V307      TOC    150 1-2      463-464 Type of Crime Code (OLD)             
               CODE                                                             
               (OLD)                         Violent Crimes                     
                                               01   Completed Rape              
                                               02   Attempted Rape              
                                               03   Sexual Attack with          
                                                    Serious Assault             
                                               04   Sexual Attack with Minor    
                                                    Assault                     
                                               05   Completed Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Serious         
                                                    Assault                     
                                               06   Completed Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Minor           
                                                    Assault                     
                                               07   Completed Robbery           
                                                    without Injury              
                                               08   Attempted Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Serious         
                                                    Assault                     
                                               09   Attempted Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Minor           
                                                    Assault                     
                                               10   Attempted Robbery           
                                                    without Injury              
                                               11   Completed Aggravated        
                                                    Assault with Injury         
                                               12   Attempted Aggravated        
                                                    Assault with Weapon         
                                               13   Threatened Assault with     
                                                    Weapon                      
                                               14   Simple Assault              
                                                    Completed with Injury       
                                               15   Sexual Assault without      
                                                    Injury                      
                                               16   Unwanted Sexual Contact     
                                                    without Force               
                                               17   Assault without Weapon      
                                                    without Injury              
                                               18   Verbal Threat of Rape       
                                               19   Verbal Threat of Sexual     
                                                    Assault                     
                                               20   Verbal Threat of Assault    
                                               90   Unwanter Sexual Contact     
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                             Personal Theft                     
                                               21   Completed Purse             
                                                    Snatching                   
                                               22   Attempted Purse             
                                                    Snatching                   
                                               23   Pocket Picking              
                                                                               
    Page 78                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                    (completed only)            
                                               24   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    Less than $10               
                                               25   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    $10 to $49                  
                                               26   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    $0 to $249                  
                                               27   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    $250 or greater             
                                               28   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    Value NA                    
                                               29   Attempted Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                                                
                                             Property Crimes                    
                                               31   Completed Burglary,         
                                                    Forcible Entry              
                                               32   Completed Burglary,         
                                                    Unlawful Entry without      
                                                    Force                       
                                               33   Attempted Forcible Entry    
                                               34   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny Less than $10       
                                               35   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny $10 to $49          
                                               36   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny $50 to $249         
                                               37   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny $250 or Greater     
                                               38   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny Value NA            
                                               39   Attempted Household         
                                                    Larceny                     
                                               40   Completed Motor Vehicle     
                                                    Theft                       
                                               41   Attempted Motor Vehicle     
                                                    Theft                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V308 CHECK 610   150 3        465-465 Can you (respondent) recall enough   
          ITEM D                           details of each incident to          
                                           distinguish from each other?         
                                               1    Yes (not a "series")        
                                               2    No (is a "series")          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V309      612    150 4        466-466 About what time did (this/the most   
                                           recent) incident happen?             
                                               During day                       
                                               1    After 6 a.m.-12 noon        
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 79    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               2    After 12 noon-6 p.m.        
                                               3    Don't know what time of     
                                                    day                         
                                               At night                         
                                               4    After 6 p.m.-12 midnight    
                                               5    After 12 midnight-6 a.m.    
                                               6    Don't know what time of     
                                                    night                       
                                               or                               
                                               7    Don't know whether day      
                                                    or night                    
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V310      613    151 1        467-467 In what city, town, or village did   
                                           this incident occur?                 
                                               1    Outside U.S.                
                                               2    Not inside a                
                                                    city/town/village           
                                               3    SAME city/town/village      
                                                    as present residence        
                                               4    DIFFERENT                   
                                                    city/town/village from      
                                                    present residence-Specify   
                                               5    Don't know                  
                                               6    Don't know if 2, 4, or 5    
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V311      616    151 2-3      468-469 Where did this incident happen?      
                                                                                
                                               IN RESPONDENT'S HOME             
                                               OR LODGING                       
                                               01   In own dwelling, own        
                                                    attached garage, or         
                                                    enclosed porch              
                                               02   In detached building on     
                                                    own property, such as       
                                                    detached garage, storage    
                                                    shed, etc.                  
                                               03   In vacation home/second     
                                                    home                        
                                               04   In hotel or motel room      
                                                    respondent was staying in   
                                                                                
                                               NEAR OWN HOME                    
                                               05   Own yard, sidewalk,         
                                                    driveway, carport,          
                                                    unenclosed porch            
                                               06   Apartment hall, storage     
                                                    area, laundry room          
                                               07   On street immediately       
                                                    adjacent to own home        
                                                                                
                                               AT, IN, OR NEAR A                
                                               FRIEND'S/RELATIVE'S/             
                                                                               
    Page 80                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               NEIGHBOR'S HOME                  
                                               08   At or in home or other      
                                                    building on their property  
                                               09   Yard, sidewalk,             
                                                    driveway, carport           
                                               10   Apartment hall, storage     
                                                    area, laundry room          
                                               11   On street immediately       
                                                    adjacent to their home      
                                                                                
                                               COMMERCIAL PLACES                
                                               12   Inside restaurant, bar,     
                                                    nightclub                   
                                               13   Inside other commercial     
                                                    building such as store,     
                                                    bank, gas station           
                                               14   Inside office, factory, or  
                                                    warehouse                   
                                                                                
                                               PARKING LOTS/GARAGES             
                                               15   Commercial parking          
                                                    lot/garage                  
                                               16   Noncommercial parking       
                                                    lot/garage                  
                                               17   Apartment/townhouse         
                                                    parking lot/garage          
                                                                                
                                               SCHOOL                           
                                               18   Inside school building      
                                               19   On school property          
                                                    (school parking area, play  
                                                    area, school bus, etc.)     
                                                                                
                                               OPEN AREAS, ON STREET            
                                               OR PUBLIC                        
                                               TRANSPORTATION                   
                                               20   In apartment yard, park,    
                                                    field, playground           
                                               21   On the street               
                                               22   On public transportation    
                                                    or in station (bus, train,  
                                                    plane, airport, depot,      
                                                    etc.)                       
                                               OTHER                            
                                               23   Other - Specify             
                                               98   Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 81    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                            INCIDENT 6 (V312-V316)                              
                            ----------------------                              
                                                                                
     V312      TOC    152 1-2      470-471 Type of Crime Code (OLD)             
               CODE                                                             
               (OLD)                         Violent Crimes                     
                                               01   Completed Rape              
                                               02   Attempted Rape              
                                               03   Sexual Attack with          
                                                    Serious Assault             
                                               04   Sexual Attack with Minor    
                                                    Assault                     
                                               05   Completed Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Serious         
                                                    Assault                     
                                               06   Completed Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Minor           
                                                    Assault                     
                                               07   Completed Robbery           
                                                    without Injury              
                                               08   Attempted Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Serious         
                                                    Assault                     
                                               09   Attempted Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Minor           
                                                    Assault                     
                                               10   Attempted Robbery           
                                                    without Injury              
                                               11   Completed Aggravated        
                                                    Assault with Injury         
                                               12   Attempted Aggravated        
                                                    Assault with Weapon         
                                               13   Threatened Assault with     
                                                    Weapon                      
                                               14   Simple Assault              
                                                    Completed with Injury       
                                               15   Sexual Assault without      
                                                    Injury                      
                                               16   Unwanted Sexual Contact     
                                                    without Force               
                                               17   Assault without Weapon      
                                                    without Injury              
                                               18   Verbal Threat of Rape       
                                               19   Verbal Threat of Sexual     
                                                    Assault                     
                                               20   Verbal Threat of Assault    
                                               90   Unwanter Sexual Contact     
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                             Personal Theft                     
                                               21   Completed Purse             
                                                    Snatching                   
                                               22   Attempted Purse             
                                                    Snatching                   
                                               23   Pocket Picking              
                                                                               
    Page 82                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                    (completed only)            
                                               24   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    Less than $10               
                                               25   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    $10 to $49                  
                                               26   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    $0 to $249                  
                                               27   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    $250 or greater             
                                               28   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    Value NA                    
                                               29   Attempted Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                                                
                                             Property Crimes                    
                                               31   Completed Burglary,         
                                                    Forcible Entry              
                                               32   Completed Burglary,         
                                                    Unlawful Entry without      
                                                    Force                       
                                               33   Attempted Forcible Entry    
                                               34   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny Less than $10       
                                               35   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny $10 to $49          
                                               36   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny $10 to $49          
                                               37   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny $250 or greater     
                                               38   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny Value NA            
                                               39   Attempted Household         
                                                    Larceny                     
                                               40   Completed Motor             
                                                    Vehicle Theft               
                                               41   Attempted Motor Vehicle     
                                                    Theft                       
                                               36   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny $50 to $249         
                                               37   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny $250 or Greater     
                                               38   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny Value NA            
                                               39   Attempted Household         
                                                    Larceny                     
                                               40   Completed Motor Vehicle     
                                                    Theft                       
                                               41   Attempted Motor Vehicle     
                                                    Theft                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 83    
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V313 CHECK 610    152 3       472-472 Can you (respondent) recall enough   
          ITEM D                           details of each incident to          
                                           distinguish from each other?         
                                               1    Yes (not a "series")        
                                               2    No (is a "series")          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V314      612    152 4        473-473 About what time did (this/the most   
                                           recent) incident happen?             
                                               During day                       
                                               1    After 6 a.m.-12 noon        
                                               2    After 12 noon-6 p.m.        
                                               3    Don't know what time of     
                                                    day                         
                                               At night                         
                                               4    After 6 p.m.-12 midnight    
                                               5    After 12 midnight-6 a.m.    
                                               6    Don't know what time of     
                                                    night                       
                                               or                               
                                               7    Don't know whether day      
                                                    or night                    
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V315      613    153 1        474-474 In what city, town, or village did   
                                           this incident occur?                 
                                               1    Outside U.S.                
                                               2    Not inside a                
                                                    city/town/village           
                                               3    SAME city/town/village      
                                                    as present residence        
                                               4    DIFFERENT                   
                                                    city/town/village from      
                                                    present residence-Specify   
                                               5    Don't know                  
                                               6    Don't know if 2, 4, or 5    
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V316      616    153 2-3      475-476 Where did this incident happen?      
                                                                                
                                               IN RESPONDENT'S HOME             
                                               OR LODGING                       
                                               01   In own dwelling, own        
                                                    attached garage, or         
                                                    enclosed porch              
                                               02   In detached building on     
                                                    own property, such as       
                                                    detached garage, storage    
                                                    shed, etc.                  
                                               03   In vacation home/second     
                                                    home                        
                                               04   In hotel or motel room      
                                                    respondent was staying in   
                                                                               
    Page 84                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               NEAR OWN HOME                    
                                               05   Own yard, sidewalk,         
                                                    driveway, carport,          
                                                    unenclosed porch            
                                               06   Apartment hall, storage     
                                                    area, laundry room          
                                               07   On street immediately       
                                                    adjacent to own home        
                                                                                
                                               AT, IN, OR NEAR A                
                                               FRIEND'S/RELATIVE'S/             
                                               NEIGHBOR'S HOME                  
                                               08   At or in home or other      
                                                    building on their property  
                                               09   Yard, sidewalk,             
                                                    driveway, carport           
                                               10   Apartment hall, storage     
                                                    area, laundry room          
                                               11   On street immediately       
                                                    adjacent to their home      
                                                                                
                                               COMMERCIAL PLACES                
                                               12   Inside restaurant, bar,     
                                                    nightclub                   
                                               13   Inside other commercial     
                                                    building such as store,     
                                                    bank, gas station           
                                               14   Inside office, factory, or  
                                                    warehouse                   
                                                                                
                                               PARKING LOTS/GARAGES             
                                               15   Commercial parking          
                                                    lot/garage                  
                                               16   Noncommercial parking       
                                                    lot/garage                  
                                               17   Apartment/townhouse         
                                                    parking lot/garage          
                                                                                
                                               SCHOOL                           
                                               18   Inside school building      
                                               19   On school property          
                                                    (school parking area, play  
                                                    area, school bus, etc.)     
                                                                                
                                               OPEN AREAS, ON STREET            
                                               OR PUBLIC                        
                                               TRANSPORTATION                   
                                               20   In apartment yard, park,    
                                                    field, playground           
                                               21   On the street               
                                               22   On public transportation    
                                                    or in station (bus, train,  
                                                    plane, airport, depot,      
                                                    etc.)                       
                                               OTHER                            
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 85    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               23   Other - Specify             
                                               98   Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                               
    Page 86                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                            INCIDENT 7 (V317-V321)                              
                            ----------------------                              
                                                                                
     V317      TOC    154 1-2      477-478 Type of Crime Code (OLD)             
               CODE                                                             
               (OLD)                         Violent Crimes                     
                                               01   Completed Rape              
                                               02   Attempted Rape              
                                               03   Sexual Attack with          
                                                    Serious Assault             
                                               04   Sexual Attack with Minor    
                                                    Assault                     
                                               05   Completed Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Serious         
                                                    Assault                     
                                               06   Completed Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Minor           
                                                    Assault                     
                                               07   Completed Robbery           
                                                    without Injury              
                                               08   Attempted Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Serious         
                                                    Assault                     
                                               09   Attempted Robbery with      
                                                    Injury from Minor           
                                                    Assault                     
                                               10   Attempted Robbery           
                                                    without Injury              
                                               11   Completed Aggravated        
                                                    Assault with Injury         
                                               12   Attempted Aggravated        
                                                    Assault with Weapon         
                                               13   Threatened Assault with     
                                                    Weapon                      
                                               14   Simple Assault              
                                                    Completed with Injury       
                                               15   Sexual Assault without      
                                                    Injury                      
                                               16   Unwanted Sexual Contact     
                                                    without Force               
                                               17   Assault without Weapon      
                                                    without Injury              
                                               18   Verbal Threat of Rape       
                                               19   Verbal Threat of Sexual     
                                                    Assault                     
                                               20   Verbal Threat of Assault    
                                               90   Unwanter Sexual Contact     
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                             Personal Theft                     
                                               21   Completed Purse             
                                                    Snatching                   
                                               22   Attempted Purse             
                                                    Snatching                   
                                               23   Pocket Picking              
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 87    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                    (completed only)            
                                               24   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    Less than $10               
                                               25   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    $10 to $49                  
                                               26   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    $0 to $249                  
                                               27   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    $250 or greater             
                                               28   Completed Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                    Value NA                    
                                               29   Attempted Personal          
                                                    Larceny without Contact     
                                                                                
                                             Property Crimes                    
                                               31   Completed Burglary,         
                                                    Forcible Entry              
                                               32   Completed Burglary,         
                                                    Unlawful Entry without      
                                                    Force                       
                                               33   Attempted Forcible Entry    
                                               34   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny Less than $10       
                                               35   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny $10 to $49          
                                               36   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny $50 to $249         
                                               37   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny $250 or Greater     
                                               38   Completed Household         
                                                    Larceny Value NA            
                                               39   Attempted Household         
                                                    Larceny                     
                                               40   Completed Motor Vehicle     
                                                    Theft                       
                                               41   Attempted Motor Vehicle     
                                                    Theft                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V318 CHECK 610   154 3        479-479 Can you (respondent) recall enough   
          ITEM D                           details of each incident to          
                                           distinguish from each other?         
                                               1    Yes (not a "series")        
                                               2    No (is a "series")          
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V319      612    154 4        480-480 About what time did (this/the most   
                                           recent) incident happen?             
                                               During day                       
                                               1    After 6 a.m.-12 noon        
                                                                               
    Page 88                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               2    After 12 noon-6 p.m.        
                                               3    Don't know what time of     
                                                    day                         
                                               At night                         
                                               4    After 6 p.m.-12 midnight    
                                               5    After 12 midnight-6 a.m.    
                                               6    Don't know what time of     
                                                    night                       
                                               or                               
                                               7    Don't know whether day      
                                                    or night                    
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V320      613    155 1        481-481 In what city, town, or village did   
                                           this incident occur?                 
                                               1    Outside U.S.                
                                               2    Not inside a                
                                                    city/town/village           
                                               3    SAME city/town/village      
                                                    as present residence        
                                               4    DIFFERENT                   
                                                    city/town/village from      
                                                    present residence-Specify   
                                               5    Don't know                  
                                               6    Don't know if 2, 4, or 5    
                                               8    Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
     V321 10   616    155 2-3      482-483 Where did this incident happen?      
                                                                                
                                               IN RESPONDENT'S HOME             
                                               OR LODGING                       
                                               01   In own dwelling, own        
                                                    attached garage, or         
                                                    enclosed porch              
                                               02   In detached building on     
                                                    own property, such as       
                                                    detached garage, storage    
                                                    shed, etc.                  
                                               03   In vacation home/second     
                                                    home                        
                                               04   In hotel or motel room      
                                                    respondent was staying in   
                                                                                
                                               NEAR OWN HOME                    
                                               05   Own yard, sidewalk,         
                                                    driveway, carport,          
                                                    unenclosed porch            
                                               06   Apartment hall, storage     
                                                    area, laundry room          
                                               07   On street immediately       
                                                    adjacent to own home        
                                                                                
                                               AT, IN, OR NEAR A                
                                               FRIEND'S/RELATIVE'S/             
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 89    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                               NEIGHBOR'S HOME                  
                                               08   At or in home or other      
                                                    building on their property  
                                               09   Yard, sidewalk,             
                                                    driveway, carport           
                                               10   Apartment hall, storage     
                                                    area, laundry room          
                                               11   On street immediately       
                                                    adjacent to their home      
                                                                                
                                               COMMERCIAL PLACES                
                                               12   Inside restaurant, bar,     
                                                    nightclub                   
                                               13   Inside other commercial     
                                                    building such as store,     
                                                    bank, gas station           
                                               14   Inside office, factory, or  
                                                    warehouse                   
                                                                                
                                               PARKING LOTS/GARAGES             
                                               15   Commercial parking          
                                                    lot/garage                  
                                               16   Noncommercial parking       
                                                    lot/garage                  
                                               17   Apartment/townhouse         
                                                    parking lot/garage          
                                                                                
                                               SCHOOL                           
                                               18   Inside school building      
                                               19   On school property          
                                                    (school parking area, play  
                                                    area, school bus, etc.)     
                                                                                
                                               OPEN AREAS, ON STREET            
                                               OR PUBLIC                        
                                               TRANSPORTATION                   
                                               20   In apartment yard, park,    
                                                    field, playground           
                                               21   On the street               
                                               22   On public transportation    
                                                    or in station (bus, train,  
                                                    plane, airport, depot,      
                                                    etc.)                       
                                               OTHER                            
                                               23   Other - Specify             
                                               98   Residue                     
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                               
    Page 90                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 91    
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                INDEX                                           
                                                                                
     SOURCE CODE                                                  PAGE          
                                                                                
     002. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48          
     003. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48          
     004. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48          
     005. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48          
     006. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48          
     007. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48          
     008. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49          
     009. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49          
     010. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49          
     014. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49          
     015. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49          
     016. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50          
     017. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50          
     018. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50          
     019. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50          
     020. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50          
     021. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50          
     022. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51          
     023. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51          
     024. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51          
     025. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51          
     026. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51          
     027. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52          
     028. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52          
     029. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52          
     030. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52          
     031. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52          
     032. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52          
     033. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52          
     034. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53          
     035. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53          
     036. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53          
     037. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53          
     038. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53          
     039. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54          
     040. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54          
     041. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54          
     042. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54          
     043. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54          
     044. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55          
     045. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55          
     046. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55          
     047. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55          
     048. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55          
     049. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55          
     050. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56          
     051. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56          
     052. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56          
     053. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56          
     054. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56          
                                                                               
    Page 92                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
     055. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56          
     056. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56          
     057. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57          
     058. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57          
     059. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57          
     060. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57          
     061. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57          
     062. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57          
     063. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58          
     064. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58          
     065. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58          
     066. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58          
     067. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58          
     068. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58          
     069. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58          
     070. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58, 59          
     071. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59          
     072. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59          
     073. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59          
     074. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59          
     075. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59          
     076. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59          
     077. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60          
     078. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60          
     079. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60          
     080. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60          
     081. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60          
     082. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60          
     083. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61          
     084. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61          
     085. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61          
     086. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61          
     087. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61          
     088. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61          
     089. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61, 62          
     090. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62          
     091. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62          
     092. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62          
     1980 MSA/STAT  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26          
     202. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1          
     203. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2          
     204. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2          
     205. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2          
     206(A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2          
     206(O) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2          
     207(A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2          
     207(O) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2          
     208(O) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2, 3          
     209(A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3          
     209(O) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4          
     210. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6          
     211. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6          
     212. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6          
     213. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6          
     214. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6, 7          
     215. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7          
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 93    
                                                                                
                                                                                
     216. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6          
     217. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7          
     218. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23          
     219. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23          
     220. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23          
     301. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10          
     302. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10          
     303. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10          
     304. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .10,11          
     305. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11          
     306. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11          
     307. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11          
     308. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11          
     309. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11          
     310. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11,12          
     311. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12          
     312. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12          
     313. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12          
     314. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12          
     315. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12          
     316. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12,13          
     317. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13          
     318. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13          
     319. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13          
     320. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14          
     321. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14          
     322. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14          
     323. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14          
     401. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28          
     402. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28          
     403. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7,28          
     404(A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7,9,28          
     404(O) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28          
     405. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7,9,28          
     406. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8,9,28          
     407(A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8,9,29          
     407(O) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29          
     408. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8,9,29          
     409. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8,9,29          
     410. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8,10, 29          
     411. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46          
     412(A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8,10, 30          
     412(O) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29          
     413. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8,10,141          
     501. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30          
     502. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30          
     503. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31          
     504. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31          
     505. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31          
     506. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31          
     508. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31          
     530. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14          
     531. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14          
     532. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31          
     533. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32          
     534. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32, 33          
                                                                               
    Page 94                                                          ICPSR  6739
                                                                                
                                                                                
     535. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15, 33          
     536. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15          
     537. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16, 33          
     538. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16, 33          
     539. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34          
     540. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34          
     541. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35          
     542. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35          
     543. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35, 36          
     544. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36          
     545. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36          
     546. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36          
     547. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36, 37          
     548. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38          
     549. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38          
     550. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39          
     551. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39          
     552. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40          
     553. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41, 42          
     554. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42          
     555. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43          
     556. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44          
     557. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17          
     558. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18, 19          
     559. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20, 21          
     560. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21          
     561. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21          
     562. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21          
     563. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22          
     564. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44          
     565. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44          
     566. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44          
     567. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45          
     568. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46          
     569. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46          
     570. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46          
     571. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22          
     572. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22          
     573. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22          
     610. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64, 69, 73, 77, 81, 86, 91          
     612. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65, 70, 73, 77, 81, 86          
     613. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65, 70, 74, 78, 82, 86, 92          
     6168 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66, 70, 74, 78, 82, 87          
     CATI GRP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22          
     EXTRA SCRAM. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1          
     FAMILY STRUCTURE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24          
     HH WEIGHT. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22          
     HOUSEHOLD NUMBER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1          
     HR FLAG. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46          
     INC/CONT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25          
     INTV CODE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25          
     LAND USE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25          
     MONTH A PAN/ROT. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27          
     NUM INCIDENTS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47          
     PANEL/ROTATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1          
     PLACE DESC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26          
                                                                               
    ICPSR  6739                                                      Page 95    
                                                                                
                                                                                
     PLACE SIZE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26          
     PRIN411. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27          
     PSEUDO- STRATUM. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23          
     RECORD TYPE "001". . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1          
     REF411 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27          
     SAMPLE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1          
     SCRAMBLED CONTROL NUMBER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1          
     SCS PERSON WEIGHT. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46, 47          
     SECUCODE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23          
     TOC CODE (OLD) . . . . . . . . . . . . 63, 68, 72, 76, 80, 84, 89          
     TYPE SEG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26          
     YEAR A  PAN/ROT. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27          
     YEAR/QUARTER . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1          

•••
persistent nightmaresexcessive fear, worrying, or cryingloss of appetite