fightingdrug useintimidation•••Developing a Conceptual Model of
Virtual Organizations for Citizen Science
•••
Andrea Wiggins
Syracuse University
337 Hinds Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244 USA
awiggins@syr.edu
Kevin Crowston
Syracuse University
348 Hinds Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244 USA
crowston@syr.edu
International Journal of Organizational Design and Engineering, In Press,
Accepted 6 May 2010.
Abstract
This paper develops an organization design-oriented
conceptual model of scientific knowledge production
through citizen science virtual organizations. Citizen
science is a form of organization design for collaborative
scientific research involving scientists and volunteers, for
which Internet-based modes of participation enable
massive virtual collaboration by thousands of members of
the public. The conceptual model provides an example of a
theory development process and discusses its application to
an exploratory study. The paper contributes a multi-level
process model for organizing investigation into the impact
of design on this form of scientific knowledge production.
Keywords: conceptual models, virtual organizations, citizen science,
cyberinfrastructure, massive virtual collaborations, theory development,
scientific knowledge production
Biographical Notes:
Andrea Wiggins is a Ph.D. Candidate in Information Science and Technology at
the School of Information Studies at Syracuse University. Her research interests
include social computing and virtual collaboration. Her dissertation is a
comparative case study of virtual organizing and public participation in scientific
knowledge production. She received her M.S. in Information (2005) from the
University of Michigan School of Information.

Kevin Crowston is a Professor in the School of Information Studies at Syracuse
University. His research examines new ways of organizing made possible by the
extensive use of information and communications technology. Specific research
topics include the development practices of Free/Libre Open Source Software
teams and work practices and technology support for citizen science research
projects, both with NSF support. He received his Ph.D. (1991) in Information
Technologies from the Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT).

1 Introduction
Virtual organization (VO) designs have been discussed in the literature for some
time. One promising area of application for VOs is to scientific research, using
information and communications technologies (ICT) to enable collaboration
among scientists (Hey & Trefethen 2005, Freeman, et al. 2005); however, the
organization of such VOs is still a new area of research. Designing effective
VOs to support scientific collaboration requires the application of social science
and computer science research and practice to the study and implementation of
new organization designs, including the integrated structuring, modeling,
development and deployment of systems and people.
Prior research on VOs for scientific work has focused primarily on
distributed collaboration among scientists and related professionals, leading to a
rich stream of research on scientific collaboratories (e.g., Finholt 2002, Chin &
Lansing 2004). However, the widespread deployment of ubiquitous computing
technologies has enabled new options for distributed collaboration. A variety of
phenomena that can be loosely described as massive virtual collaboration (e.g.,
social networking, open source software development, Wikipedia (Crowston &
Scozzi 2008, Nov 2007, Forte & Bruckman 2008)) prompt us to consider the
potential of VOs for supporting large-scale, distributed and heterogeneous
participation in scientific research.
We are interested in particular in the phenomenon of citizen science (Clark
& Illman 2001, Cohn 2008), that is, research projects involving “partnerships
between volunteers and scientists that answer real-world questions” (Bonney &
Shirk 2007). These project-based partnerships are a form of VO, fitting the U.S.
National Science Foundation’s definition of “a group of individuals whose
members and resources may be dispersed geographically, but who function as a
coherent unit through the use of cyberinfrastructure”1 . There are few studies of
this form of VO, however, so design principles and potential benefits for science
are still being established.
Conceptualizing processes of participation is a first step to developing a
theoretical basis for designing virtual organizations for citizen science. This
1

from the Virtual Organizations as Sociotechnical Systems (VOSS) Program
Solicitation, NSF 09-540

paper draws from social science theory to develop an interdisciplinary designoriented conceptual model of massive virtual collaboration for scientific
knowledge production. Although organizational emergence does not always
unfold in the top-down fashion that this design-oriented perspective suggests, the
model is suited to the goals of providing a foundation for future research and
practical decision-making. The model contributes a multi-level model for
organizing investigation into organization, task and technology design in virtual
citizen science projects.

2 Motivation
Citizen science projects conducted via web technologies can yield massive
virtual collaborations based on voluntary contributions by diverse participants.
The increasing scale of citizen science projects, some of which involve hundreds
of thousands of members of the public in distributed data collection and analysis,
suggests a need for additional research. In particular, designing organizations to
support this form of scientific knowledge production requires understanding the
effects of organization and task design on the scientific outcomes of citizen
science projects.
Citizen science is related to long-standing programs employing volunteer
monitoring for natural resource management (Cooper, et al. 2007, Firehock &
West 1995) and is often employed as a form of education and outreach to
promote public understanding of science (Brossard, et al. 2005, Krasny &
Bonney 2005). However, modern citizen science projects are increasingly
focused on benefits to the scientific research as well (Bonney & LaBranche
2004, Baretto, et al. 2003). The evidence is clear that in the right circumstances,
citizen science can work on a massive scale and is capable of producing high
quality data as well as unexpected insights and innovations (Trumbull, et al.
2000, Fore, et al. 2001).
Public contributions to scientific research can take a variety of forms, with
participation ranging from nearly passive to deep engagement in the full process
of scientific inquiry. Diverse volunteer populations can contribute to scientific
research through a variety of activities, from primary school students engaging
in structured classroom projects, to families volunteering together in “bioblast”
one-day organism census events, to geographically-distributed individuals
monitoring wildlife populations over time.
In the ecological sciences, citizen science projects have focused primarily on
observation of ecosystems and wildlife populations (e.g., monarch butterflies,
birds, reef fishes), where volunteers form a human sensor network for data
collection. For example, in the Great Sunflower Project2 , volunteers grow
sunflowers, then report on the numbers of bees that visit the plants in order to
gauge the level of pollination activity.
2

http://www.greatsunflower.org/

In contrast to these data collection projects, in astronomy research,
volunteers apply superior human perceptual capacities to computationally
difficult image recognition tasks, providing an important service in data analysis.
Galaxy Zoo3 is such a project, organized by an international team of
professional astronomers to classify images of galaxies from the Sloan Digital
Sky Survey (Cho & Clery 2009). Volunteers contribute to data reduction
through classification tasks performed through a web portal that presents images
of galaxies and asks volunteers to make judgements about specific
characteristics of the shapes of galaxies. In its first instantiation, Galaxy Zoo
volunteers classified 750,000 galaxies in record time and the data have been reincorporated into virtual astronomical observatory tools used by both
professional researchers and the public. In its second and third versions, Galaxy
Zoo 2 and Galaxy Zoo: Hubble, the project has elicited progressively more
complex classification judgments from volunteers, implemented based on the
high quality of the results from the simple initial classification. At the start of its
third year, Galaxy Zoo had classified over 56 million galaxies and counts a
growing contributor base of over a quarter million volunteers around the world.
Beyond simply providing image processing services for science, Galaxy Zoo
participants have made new discoveries, such as Hanny’s Voorwerp, an
astronomical object of unknown nature (voorwerp means “object” in Dutch),
which was discovered in 2007 by Hanny van Arkel, a Dutch elementary school
teacher. Hanny’s Voorwerp is remarkable for its unusual form and color and for
emitting more energy than any object previously observed in the universe. The
Galaxy Zoo researchers will use the Hubble Telescope to examine this new
astronomical body. Hanny’s Voorwerp demonstrates how profoundly volunteer
contributions to scientific research can influence the course of scientific
knowledge production.
In addition to innovation, Galaxy Zoo volunteers deliver quality; their
collective reliability is as good or better than that of professional astronomers.
The project’s leaders ensure quality by having each image evaluated by multiple
volunteers (up to 250 ratings per image), with algorithmic indentification of lowconsensus items for professional review. Even without these quality assurance
strategies, researchers have found that elementary school children can provide
scientifically valid data for species identification, with seventh-graders reporting
counts of crab species at 95% accuracy and third-graders correctly identifying
animals 80% of the time, an acceptable reliability rate for most ecological
studies (Delaney, et al. 2007).
Organizational designs that involve the public are not new to science (e.g.,
the Audubon Christmas bird count started in 1900), but we are now reaching the
point where ubiquitous computing makes broad participation by the public in
scientific work a realistic research strategy for an increased variety of scientific
research problems. The potential benefits of citizen science are beginning to be
3

http://www.galaxyzoo.org/

realized more widely, particularly when coupled with traditional scientific
studies; combined with the growth of technologies that can enable broader
participation, this has lead to a swiftly increasing number of projects (Silvertown
2009). Designing such projects for sustainable and scientifically valid outcomes
requires a better conceptual understanding of this organizational design,
however, which is the goal of this paper.

3 Theory Development Process
There are many strategies for theory development. In the interdisciplinary
research that characterizes many phenomenon-oriented studies, contextualizing
an existing theoretical framework can provide a strong initial model for study of
a new phenomenon or research context. Developing an initial conceptualization
requires working out how to transfer what we know from other settings to a new
context, given their similarities and differences. For contextualization of a model
to provide satisfying results, the initial model must bear some resemblance to an
empirically and theoretically informed understanding of the phenomenon.
To develop our model, we first considered a variety of prior settings. At the
most basic level, we chose to analyse citizen science projects as a kind of small
group, specifically, a work team. We selected the literature on small groups as a
starting point because there are a number of functional similarities in the
structure of participation, making it reasonable to employ a model drawn from
small groups theory as a starting point. For the current study, our conceptual
model draws on work in the small group literature, (e.g., Hackman & Morris
1978, Marks, et al. 2001, McGrath & Hollingshead 1994). Although citizen
science efforts are typically organized as projects, which are a distinct unit of
analysis, their governance and structure are frequently similar to those of an
organization, making our conceptual model relevant to organizational design
(and vice versa).
We also examined a variety of more specific models developed to describe
particular empirical settings. Citizen science projects are similar in some
respects to massive virtual collaborations and peer production phenomena such
as FLOSS or Wikipedia. These technology-mediated massive virtual
collaborations are frequently referred to as forms of crowdsourcing, an illdefined but now common term which refers to a set of distributed production
models that make an open call for contributions from a large, undefined network
of people (Howe 2006). Initially introduced as a novel alternative business
model, more recent popular use of the term has applied it to any form of
collective intelligence that draws on large numbers of participants through the
Internet.
While most citizen science does not fully meet the definition of peer
production (Benkler 2002), in which the prototypical model is non-hierarchical
and self-organizing, they do share other features of this work design. At a
conceptual level, citizen science VOs and other lightweight peer production

models are often subject to pooled interdependence, in which each incremental
piece of work contributes to the whole without being contingent on other parts.
This strategy relies on minimally sized and minimally complex work units that
are completed by large numbers of contributors (Haythornthwaite 2009), which
can make up for the inconsistency of participation and turn-over of contributors
to maintain sustainability despite dynamic membership (Butler 2001). These
principles of task design are also consistent with the design requirements for
most virtual citizen science projects, which must balance volunteer recruitment
and retention efforts, and in some cases may need to acquire greater numbers to
achieve geographic skill, as well as making up for inconsistencies in
participation.
Additional related studies focus on cyberinfrastructure (CI), that is, largescale ICT to support distributed scientific research, which is also known as einfrastructure, or in scientific contexts, eScience (Jackson, et al. 2007, Edwards,
et al. 2009). Virtual citizen science similarly relies increasingly on ICT to
overcome discontinuities inherent in massively distributed work, often with the
goal of increasing the scale of participation. The level of CI support for citizen
science VOs also varies substantially, from simple data collection to more
sophisticated task and social support. Initial studies of CI projects have focused
primarily on the same challenges as those of collaboratories, particularly
coordination, geographic dispersion and social aspects of science and technology
(e.g., Hepsш, et al. 2009, Lee, et al. 2006, Lawrence, et al. 2007). Unlike
collaboratories, CI projects were found to have more decentralized leadership
with the increasing scale of participation resulting in increasing discontinuities
and reliance on ICT to moderate their effects.
However, none of these prior efforts fully address the unique characteristics
of the citizen science setting, as the combination of volunteer contributions and
scientific goals pose particular constraints on task design. For example, assuring
the reliability of data collection is critical to the value of a scientific project, but
not a matter that can necessarily be left to the “wisdom of crowds” (Surowiecki
2004, Roman 2009). Including volunteers in scientific research projects results
in very different distributed organizational structures than those of scientific
collaboratories, raising new challenges for effective collaboration. Current
research on CI typically assumes that scientists and related professionals are the
primary participants; for example, the design of scientific collaboratories may
tacitly assume that participants have comparable and high levels of skill and will
contribute relatively equally. This is rarely the case for citizen science
volunteers, who may have widely varying levels of skill or knowledge and are
likely to contribute at levels differing by orders of magnitude. Combined, these
factors raise unique concerns for designing systems and organizations to support
citizen science. To address these concerns required development of a tailored
conceptual model.
Given the similarity of citizen science VOs to other forms of massive virtual
collaboration, we drew initially on our prior research on FLOSS teams by

starting our work with a conceptual model developed from a review of empirical
literature on FLOSS development, which itself extends an earlier framework
(Crowston, et al. 2005). To adapt this model for citizen science projects, we
examined the literature in related areas—most notably volunteerism and
scientific collaboration—to tailor the model for the context of online
participation. The original constructs were examined individually and retained,
replaced or augmented by other constructs. Synthesizing elements from
organization design, sociology and studies of nonprofit management with a
framework based in small group theory strengthens our conceptual model for
understanding the antecedents of scientific knowledge production through
massive virtual collaboration.
Among the adaptations, the more contextually relevant processes of
scientific research, data management and volunteer management were
substituted for software development practices and firm involvement practices
noted in the FLOSS setting. Similarly, the concepts of software implementation
and evolution were translated into knowledge and innovation, the desired
outputs of scientific knowledge production. The emergent states of roles and
commitment were retained for their potential relevance to the context of citizen
science VOs. Finally, social processes were included in the individual level of
the model as joining and contributing processes, with the expectation that
additional social processes will be revealed through empirical research. The
result of this process is a conceptual model that is firmly anchored in basic
theory, whilst still being adapted to the unique features of this setting.

4 Conceptual Model
In this section we present the conceptual model for further study. Figure 1 shows
the initial version of our model.
As noted above, the basic structure is drawn from work on work teams.
Guzzo & Dickson (1996), p. 308 defined a work team as “made up of
individuals who see themselves and who are seen by others as a social entity,
who are interdependent because of the tasks they perform as members of a
group, who are embedded in one or more larger social system (e.g., community,
or organization) and who perform tasks that affect others (such as customers or
coworkers)”. A team differs from a community of practice because members
have a shared output, whereas in communities of practice members share
common practices, but are individually responsible for their own tasks (Wenger
1999). Members of a citizen science project share a goal and social identity and
they perform interdependent tasks. Although the individual tasks are typically
designed to reduce reciprocal and sequential interdependencies and thereby
reduce coordination costs, the collective outcome is strongly affected by pooled
interdependence (Thompson, et al. 2003). Even though individual tasks seem
independent, the final product comprises the collective contributions and value
of each individual contribution is dependent upon others’ contributions.

Drawing on further on the small groups literature, we organized our
conceptual model as an input-mediator-output-input (IMOI) model (Ilgen, et al.
2005). We selected the IMOI model because it provides a theoretical framework
of socially-embedded teams over time and improves on the prior IPO models of
work groups by including feedback loops and separating emergent states from
processes. The structure of an IMOI model categorizes constituent concepts as
inputs, mediators and outputs. Inputs are the starting conditions of a team, which
includes member characteristics and project/task characteristics (Hackman &
Kaplan 1974). Mediators represent factors that mediate the influence of inputs
on outputs and are further divided into two categories: processes and emergent
states. Processes represent dynamic interactions among team members as they
work on their projects, leading to the outputs. Emergent states are constructs that
characterize dynamic team properties, which vary based upon context; they
describe the team’s cognitive, motivational and affective states, rather than
activities and processes. Outputs are the task and non-task consequences of a
team functioning. The feedback loop from outputs to inputs treats outputs as
inputs to future team processes and emergent states; as a result, not all processes
or inputs may be active at any given time, depending on the state of system
functioning.

Figure 1: A conceptual model of citizen science virtual organizations.
In the remainder of this section, we present each of the elements of the
model in more detail.

4.1 Inputs
Inputs are the starting conditions of a project, including both individual-level
characteristics and project-level characteristics. At the individual level, staff and
volunteers come to the project with diverse demographics, levels of skill and
motivations for participation that affect their individual contributions to the
project. While demographics and skills will vary among volunteers involved in
different projects, both practical reports and academic theory suggest a number
of common motivators for volunteerism, which may have differential effects on
individual experiences and performance (Lawrence 2006, Cnaan & Cascio
1999).
At the organizational level, we examine the effects of organizational, task
and cyberinfrastructure technology design. Organization design is a key point of

differentiation between citizen science VOs and other scientific collaboratories.
The configuration and geographical distribution of participants can vary widely,
as can the size of the core research group, which can range from a single PI with
a research assistant or two to an interorganizational network of governmental
agencies, scientific researchers and nonprofit organizations, each with different
interests to fulfill and resources to contribute. However, the overall structure is
likely to mirror the core/periphery structure that describes many distributed
projects with volunteer contributors: a core of highly involved project leaders,
surrounded by a larger group of active volunteers and a still larger group of
occasional contributors (Crowston, et al. 2006). One important difference in
citizen science projects is that there are often formal status differences that
separate these groups, e.g., most core participants likely have graduate training
and formal roles in the projects, whilst other participants are lay volunteers.
The second organizational input, “task design”, encompasses several related
concepts. Task design in this context includes the research project design for the
study, the job design for volunteers and researchers and the task design for
citizen science protocols. Citizen science research designs and protocols must
reflect careful consideration of job design and task design (Cohn 2008). Some
tasks may be feasible and interesting for volunteers, with proper design, whilst
others may have to be reserved for paid professional staff. Organization design
theories link individual-level inputs and outputs (motivation and performance) to
the task design (Ilgen & Hollenbeck 1991), as do theories of volunteerism
(Pearce 1993, Wilson 2000).
Finally, technology design and use is of particular interest given the potential
of cyberinfrastructure to support citizen science VOs, in particular with data
management (Chin & Lansing 2004). Best practices guides recommend that
project partnerships include a scientist and an educator to address the scientific
and educational goals of the project and a technologist to address potentially
substantial data management and information systems challenges (Bonney &
LaBranche 2004). When considering how organization design and task design
interact with technology in the context of scientific VOs, understanding the
range of interactions between such diverse end users and the technologies that
support participation is important to creating usable, robust cyberinfrastructure
systems for collecting useful contributions from distributed volunteers (Luther,
et al. 2009).
At the individual level, similarities to peer production models provoke the
perennial questions about motivation to participate. While participation in peer
production is generally expected to be motivated by self-interest, virtual citizen
science projects appear more altruistic on the surface. In practice, this perception
seems partially true; for example, participants in the Galaxy Zoo project report
multiple motivations that reflect both altruism and self-interest (Raddick, et al.
2009b). In discussing virtual citizen science practices, Raddick:2009b also
emphasize the potential social benefits arising from progressive levels of
participant engagement in citizen science. This general model of progressive

engagement is echoed elsewhere (e.g., Preece & Shneiderman 2009, Fischer
2002) and core-periphery models of voluntary participation, much like those
seen in research on more traditional work groups (e.g., Cummings & Cross
2003), are a consistent feature across a number of these domains, such as open
source (e.g., Crowston, et al. 2006).

4.2 Processes
In the IMOI model, the inputs are conceptualized as influencing the
effectiveness of projects through two sets of moderators, processes and emergent
states. Processes are the dynamic interactions among group members leading to
outputs. In this context, volunteer involvement can vary widely, including data
collection, reduction and analysis tasks. Understanding these work practices is
the first key to designing and supporting technological and social arrangements
that support intellectual production and innovation in virtual citizen science
projects.
At the organizational level, the processes of interest include that of scientific
research itself. The nature of the research and discipline has an important
influence on the kinds of data and analysis required and the mapping of tasks to
different actors, e.g., volunteers or professional staff. Similarly, data
management processes have a significant impact on project outcomes. A
particular concern is the challenge facing interorganizational projects that must
ensure interoperability and reliability of data created by volunteers. Finally, a
unique aspect of this context is the applicability of volunteer management
processes often associated with nonprofit management, e.g., recruitment,
selection, orientation, training, supervision, evaluation, recognition and retention
of volunteers (Pearce 1993).

4.3 Emergent States
Emergent states are dynamic properties of the group that vary as a function of
inputs and processes; past research suggests a number of potentially relevant
emergent states. These include task-related factors that describe the state of the
group in terms of its progress on the scientific task, as well as social factors that
describe social states of the group that enable that work (Lee, et al. 2006). At the
level of the project, research on other kinds of VOs has identified the importance
of factors such as trust, cohesion, conflict and morale that affect the sense of
group community and thus its long-term sustainability (Markus, et al. 2000).
At the individual level, the evolution of volunteers through different roles in
the group, from new volunteer through sustained contributor and potentially to
more central roles, is relevant to organization design. A related concern is
volunteers’ level of commitment to the project and how it influences their task
performance (Cnaan & Cascio 1999). Understanding how these factors affect the
social and technological barriers to and enablers of participation is important for
effective cyberinfrastructure and organization designs.

Processes and emergent states are conceptualized as moderating the relation
between inputs and outputs of the project in the IMOI model. At the individual
level, the input elements of organization, task and technology design affect
motivation and participation of distributed volunteers (Lawrence 2006, Sproull
& Kiesler 2005). At the project level, they may transform the means of
production of scientific knowledge, shaping the demand for supporting
cyberinfrastructure and potentially transforming the organization design.

4.4 Outputs
Finally, outputs represent task and non-task consequences of a functioning
group, signaling effectiveness. At the individual level, the task outputs are
contributions, often raw or processed data, although other contributions may be
possible. In addition to the individual-level outputs, a citizen science VO will
have outputs at the project level, such as the scientific knowledge created from
the data. Innovative findings, processes and tools can also emerge from
involving the public in scientific research, with the potential for dramatic
discoveries like Hanny’s Voorwerp.
Hackman’s (1987) model of group effectiveness also includes non-task
outputs. Satisfaction of individual participants’ needs, such as individual
learning and personal satisfaction, are measures of effectiveness closely related
to the educational mission of many citizen science projects. Finally, Hackman
also includes the group’s continued ability to work together, speaking to the
sustainability of the project’s goals and social structure. In other words, a VO is
not effective if it achieves a goal but drives away participants in the process.
An important feature of the IMOI model is that outputs themselves become
future inputs to the dynamic processes. Positive personal outcomes can lead to
increased motivation for future participation and individual learning can increase
a member’s ability to contribute. At the project level, learning may lead to
innovation in research approach, resulting in changes to the task design and
group processes. Positive project outputs may lead to increased interest among
practitioners in engaging the public in research and increased visibility for the
project, helping to recruit and retain additional volunteers. At the societal level,
the success of a project may affect public participation in and perception of
science, create informal learning opportunities and enable knowledge production
at an unprecedented pace and scale (Trumbull, et al. 2000, Cohn 2008).

4.5 Relationships Between Levels
To capture the interplay between dynamics at the level of individual members
and the overall project, in this model, we nested two IMOI models. The
organizational and individual levels are differentiated in order to better guide
organization design and engineering goals while recognizing that many of the
individual-level characteristics that are relevant to decision-making are outside
of the direct control of project organizers. For example, the member

characteristics identified as inputs in the FLOSS model are separated from those
factors that are more readily influenced by the top-down styles of organizing that
dominates current citizen science practices.
In the model, the individual level and organizational level IMOI models are
connected with dashed lines, representing potentially interesting connections
between individual participation and organizational operation. These
connections are drawn from the literature on organizational behavior and
volunteerism to better reflect the phenomenon, as the organizational behavior
literature makes assumptions about the relationships between individuals and
organizations which must be validated against findings from studies of volunteer
management for transfer to a context of voluntary participation.
For example, the joining process at the individual level—typically an online
registration—are affected by the volunteer management processes and scientific
research processes occurring at the organizational level. Although surveying a
sample of citizen science projects confirms that relatively few projects have
volunteer screening processes that would prevent individual participation based
on member characteristics, an example of this relationship can be seen in another
astronomy citizen science project, NASA’s Stardust@home4. In order to ensure
quality outcomes, would-be participants must pass a relatively challenging test
to demonstrate adequate skill in using the “Virtual Microscope” to locate
particles collected from outer space before online registration is even permitted.
The link between these joining and research processes, as well as other
connections shown in the IMOI model, makes explicit our expectations about the
broader context of citizen science VOs. These relationships can be examined
more closely through empirical studies to verify or disconfirm the usefulness of
these links and concepts, providing insight for revisions and further model
development.

5 Discussion and Future Work
The IMOI model presented in this paper provides an example of using an
existing theoretical framework as a template for a contextualized conceptual
model suitable for guiding research in a novel context. In this section, we discuss
the exploratory research it guides.
This conceptual model is currently being employed as part of an exploratory
study. The goal of the study is to develop a refined model for further research,
and to guide cyberinfrastructure and organization design for citizen science VOs.
The larger study design involves developing a typology of citizen science
projects, which provides input to refinement of the conceptual model. The
typology will provide a resource for multiple practitioner audiences and is
guiding case selection for in-depth studies to validate and further refine the
conceptual model.
4

http://stardustathome.ssl.berkeley.edu/

For the initial stage of research, semi-structured interviews with citizen
science project organizers focused on understanding the inputs and processes at
the project and individual levels. Therefore, interview questions inquired into
how organizers became involved in their current projects and how they were
involved with the scientific, volunteer and data management aspects of the
project. The participants’ responses confirmed the relevance of the contextspecific organizational inputs and processes and touched on several other
constructs identified in our model.
Participant observation provided triangulation for the interview responses
and fieldwork also demonstrated the relative influence of some factors in
different contexts of activity. However, inductive content analysis coding also
yielded additional themes to consider. Some of these are more specific types of
inputs, outputs, or processes; for example, the relevant scientific research
processes can refer to study development, pilot testing, data collection, analysis,
or quality control, among other processes. Each of these processes is differently
impacted by the inclusion of the public in scientific research. Most other
emergent themes relate to the physical contexts and cultural environments in
which the project operates (Wiggins 2010), which are characteristics that don’t
fit neatly into the current model, suggesting a point for future revision of the
model.
The conceptual model described here has provided direction for initial
exploratory research and suggested directions for future work to further develop
and validate the model. In particular, the preliminary findings suggest that
adopting the project rather than the organization as the unit of analysis will make
the model more consistent with empirical observation without imposing the
assumptions about organizational arrangements that are implicit in the current
conceptual model. Empirical research found that the standard organizational
forms can be overly simplistic or otherwise inadequate as a basis for
understanding organizing in citizen science VOs (Wiggins 2010). The project
level of group interaction is distinct from those of small work groups and
organizations (Grudin 1994), which has implications for organization design
efforts. Project teams and communities of practice can be distinguished by their
goal orientation among other features (Wenger 1999), but empirical observation
of citizen science VOs to date indicates a hybrid “community of purpose” might
better describe many projects, with characteristics of both a project team and a
community of practice or interest. Revisions based on the initial empirical
findings will strengthen the model by reconceptualizing structures and processes
to better accommodate the wide variety of ways that projects organize their
activities.

6 Conclusion
In summary, synthesizing elements of prior research on small groups with
contextually relevant concepts provides a theoretical foundation for studying the

organization of large numbers of virtual volunteers for scientific research.
Several differences in settings between prior work and the citizen science VO
context suggest the need to both validate the applicability of this body of theory
and search for possible extensions.
This paper contributes a multi-level design-oriented conceptual model for
organizing investigation into the impact of design on scientific research by
distributed volunteers in collaboration with scientists. The discussion also
describes the process of model development through contextualization of an
existing theoretical framework. Finally, the conceptual model complements the
prior research on scientific collaboratories and cyberinfrastructure projects by
developing a theoretical foundation to understanding the design of virtual
organizations that involve the public in scientific research.

7 Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by U.S. NSF grant 09-43049, “VOSS: Theory
and design of virtual organizations for citizen science”.

References
C. Baretto, et al. (2003). ‘A Model for Integrating the Public into Scientific
Research’. Journal of Geoscience Education 50(1):71–75.
Y. Benkler (2002). ‘Coase’s Penguin, or, Linux and the Nature of the
Firm.’. Yale Law Journal 112(3):367–445.
R. Bonney & M. LaBranche (2004). ‘Citizen Science: Involving the Public
in Research’. ASTC Dimensions p. 13.
R. Bonney & J. L. Shirk (2007). ‘Citizen Science Central’. Connect pp. 8–
10.
D. Brossard, et al. (2005). ‘Scientific Knowledge and Attitude Change: The
Impact of a Citizen Science Project’. International Journal of Science
Education 27(9):1099–1121.
B. Butler (2001). ‘Membership size, communication activity, and
sustainability: A resource-based model of online social structures’.
Information Systems Research 12(4):346–362.
G. Chin, Jr. & C. Lansing (2004). ‘Capturing and supporting contexts for
scientific data sharing via the biological sciences collaboratory’. In
Proc. CSCW 2004, pp. 409–418.
A. Cho & D. Clery (2009). ‘International year of astronomy: Astronomy
Hits the Big Time’. Science 323(5912):332.
F. Clark & D. Illman (2001). ‘Dimensions of civic science: Introductory
essay’. Science communication 23(1):5.
R. A. Cnaan & T. A. Cascio (1999). ‘Performance and commitment: Issues
in management of volunteers in human service organizations’. Journal
of Social Service Research 24:1–38.
J. P. Cohn (2008). ‘Citizen Science: Can Volunteers Do Real Research? ’.
BioScience 58(3):192–107.
C. B. Cooper, et al. (2007). ‘Citizen Science as a Tool for Conservation in
Residential Ecosystems’. Ecology and Society 12(2).
K. Crowston, et al. (2005). ‘Effective work practices for FLOSS
development: A model and propositions’. In Proceedings of the 38th
Hawai’i International Conference on System Sciences, Big Island,
Hawai’i.
K. Crowston & B. Scozzi (2008). ‘Coordination practices within Free/Libre
Open Source Software development teams: The bug fixing process’.
Journal of Database Management 19(2):1–30.
K. Crowston, et al. (2006). ‘Core and periphery in Free/Libre and Open
Source software team communications’. In Hawai’i International
Conference on System Sciences, vol. 39, p. 118. IEEE.

J. Cummings & R. Cross (2003). ‘Structural properties of work groups and
their consequences for performance’. Social Networks 25(3):197–210.
D. G. Delaney, et al. (2007). ‘Marine invasive species: validation of citizen
science and implications for national monitoring networks’. Biological
Invasions pp. 1573–1464.
P. Edwards, et al. (2009). ‘Introduction: An Agenda for Infrastructure
Studies’. Journal of the Association for Information Systems
10(5):364–374.
T. Finholt (2002). ‘Collaboratories’. Ann. Rev. Info. Sci. Tech. 36(1).
K. Firehock & J. West (1995). ‘A Brief History of Volunteer Biological
Water Monitoring Using Macroinvertebrates’. Journal of the North
American Benthological Society 14(1):197–202.
G. Fischer (2002). ‘Beyond ‘couch potatoes’: From consumers to designers
and active contributors’. First Monday 7(12-2).
L. Fore, et al. (2001). ‘Assessing the performance of volunteers in
monitoring streams’. Freshwater Biology 46:109–123.
A. Forte & A. Bruckman (2008). ‘Scaling consensus: Increasing
decentralization in Wikipedia governance’. In Proceedings of the 41st
Hawai’i International Conference on System Sciences, Big Island of
Hawai’i. IEEE.
P. A. Freeman, et al. (2005). ‘Cyberinfrastructure for science and
engineering: Promises and challenges’. Proceedings of the IEEE
93(3):682–691.
J. Grudin (1994). ‘Groupware and social dynamics: eight challenges for
developers’. Communications of the ACM 37(1):92–105.
R. A. Guzzo & M. W. Dickson (1996). ‘Teams in organizations: Recent
research on performance and effectiveness’. Annual Review of
Psychology 47:307–338.
J. Hackman (1987). ‘The design of work teams’. Handbook of
organizational behavior 315:342.
J. R. Hackman & R. Kaplan (1974). ‘Interventions into group process: An
approach to improving the effectiveness of groups’. Decision Sciences
5:459–480.
J. R. Hackman & C. G. Morris (1978). ‘Group tasks, group interaction
process, and group performance effectiveness: A review and proposed
integration’. In L. Berkowitz (ed.), Group Processes, vol. 8 of
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, pp. 45–99. Academic
Press, New York.
C. Haythornthwaite (2009). ‘Crowds and Communities: Light and
Heavyweight Models of Peer Production’. In Proceedings of the
Hawai’i International conference on Systems Sciences, 2009.

V. Hepsш, et al. (2009). ‘Ecologies of e-Infrastructures’. Journal of the AIS
10(5):430–446.
T. Hey & A. E. Trefethen (2005). ‘Cyberinfrastructure for e-science’.
Science 308(5723):817–821.
J. Howe (2006). ‘The rise of crowdsourcing’. Wired Magazine 14(6):1–4.
D. R. Ilgen & J. R. Hollenbeck (1991). ‘The structure of work: Job design
and roles’. Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychology
2:165–207.
D. R. Ilgen, et al. (2005). ‘Teams in organizations: From Input-ProcessOutput Models to IMOI Models’. Annual Review of Psychology
56:517–543.
S. Jackson, et al. (2007). ‘Understanding infrastructure: history, heuristics,
and cyberinfrastructure policy’. First Monday 12(6).
M. Krasny & R. Bonney (2005). Environmental Education Through Citizen
Science and Participatory Action Research, chap. Ch. 13.
Environmental education and advocacy : changing perspectives of
ecology and education. Cambridge University Press, New York.
A. Lawrence (2006). “No Personal Motive? ’ Volunteers, Biodiversity, and
the False Dichotomies of Participation’. Ethics, Place & Environment:
A Journal of Philosophy & Geography 9(3):279–298.
K. Lawrence, et al. (2007). ‘Warm Fronts and High Pressure Systems:
Overcoming Geographic Dispersion in a Meteorological
Cyberinfrastructure Project’. In Hawaii International Conference on
Systems Sciences, vol. 40, p. 675. IEEE.
C. P. Lee, et al. (2006). ‘The human infrastructure of cyberinfrastructure’.
In Proceedings of the Conference on Computer-supported Cooperative
Work (CSCW), pp. 483–492, New York, NY, USA. ACM.
K. Luther, et al. (2009). ‘Pathfinder: an online collaboration environment
for citizen scientists’. In Proceedings of the Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems(CHI), pp. 239–248.
M. A. Marks, et al. (2001). ‘A Temporally Based Framework and
Taxonomy of Team Processes’. Academy of Management Review
26(3):356–376.
M. Markus, et al. (2000). ‘What makes a virtual organization work? ’. Sloan
Management Review 42(1):13–26.
J. E. McGrath & A. B. Hollingshead (1994). Groups Interacting With
Technology. Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.
O. Nov (2007). ‘What motivates Wikipedians? ’. Communication of the
ACM 50(11):60–64.
J. Pearce (1993). Volunteers: The organizational behavior of unpaid
workers. Routledge.

J. Preece & B. Shneiderman (2009). ‘The Reader-to-Leader Framework:
Motivating Technology-Mediated Social Participation’. AIS Trans. on
Hum.-Comp. Interact. 1(1):13–32.
M. Raddick, et al. (2009a). ‘Citizen Science: Status and Research Directions
for the Coming Decade’. In AGB Stars and Related
Phenomenastro2010: The Astronomy and Astrophysics Decadal
Survey, vol. 2010, p. 46P.
M. Raddick, et al. (2009b). ‘Galaxy Zoo: Exploring the Motivations of
Citizen Science Volunteers’. Arxiv preprint arXiv:0909.2925 .
D. Roman (2009). ‘Crowdsourcing and the question of expertise’.
Communications of the ACM 52(12):12.
J. Silvertown (2009). ‘A new dawn for citizen science’. Trends in Ecology
& Evolution 24:467–471.
L. Sproull & S. Kiesler (2005). ‘Public volunteer work on the Internet’.
Transforming Enterprise: The Economic and Social Implications of
Information Technology p. 361.
J. Surowiecki (2004). The wisdom of crowds: Why the many are smarter
than the few and how collective wisdom shapes business, economies,
societies, and nations. Doubleday Books.
J. Thompson, et al. (2003). Organizations in action: Social science bases of
administrative theory. Transaction Pub.
D. J. Trumbull, et al. (2000). ‘Thinking scientifically during participation in
a citizen-science project’. Science Education 84(2):265–275.
E. Wenger (1999). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and
identity. Cambridge University Press.
A. Wiggins (2010). ‘Organizing from the Middle Out: Citizen Science in
the National Parks’. In Proceedings of iConference 2010.
J. Wilson (2000). ‘Volunteering’. Annual Review of Sociology 26:215–240.

•••
not sensitive to the feelings of others cruel or violent toward pets or other animals easily frustrated 