
cyber-bullyingfightingdrug use

•••

National Crime Victimization Survey: School Crime Supplement, 2001 •••United States Department of Justice Bureau of Justice Statistics ICPSR 3477  NATIONAL CRIME VICTIMIZATION SURVEY: SCHOOL CRIME SUPPLEMENT, 2001 (ICPSR 3477) Principal Investigator United States Department of JusticeBureau of Justice Statistics First ICPSR Edition September 2002 Inter-university Consortium forPolitical and Social Research P.O. Box 1248 Ann Arbor, Michigan 48106  BIBLIOGRAPHIC CITATION Publications based on ICPSR data collections should acknowledge those sources by means of bibliographiccitations. To ensure that such source attributions are captured for social science bibliographic utilities,citations must appear in footnotes or in the reference section of publications. The bibliographic citation forthis data collection is: U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics. NATIONAL CRIME VICTIMIZATION SURVEY: SCHOOL CRIME SUPPLEMENT, 2001 [Computerfile]. Conducted by U.S. Dept. of Commerce,Bureau of the Census. ICPSR ed. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium of Political and Social Research [producer and distributor],2002. REQUEST FOR INFORMATION ON USE OF ICPSR RESOURCES To provide funding agencies with essential information about use of archival resources and to facilitate the exchange of information about ICPSR participants'research activities, users of ICPSR data are requested tosend to ICPSR bibliographic citations for each completedmanuscript or thesis abstract. Please indicate in a coverletter which data were used. DATA DISCLAIMER The original collector of the data, ICPSR, and the relevant funding agency bear no responsibility for usesof this collection or for interpretations or inferences based upon such uses.  TABLE OF CONTENTS GENERAL INFORMATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 What is the 2001 School Crime Supplement? ................................... 3 What is the purpose of the SCS .............................................. 3 Who sponsors the 2001 SCS? .............................................. 3 Under what authority is the School Crime Supplement Conducted? ................. 3 When was the 2001 School Crime Supplement conducted? ........................ 3 ELIGIBLE SCS RESPONDENTS ................................................. 4 Who is eligible for the SCS? ................................................ 4 Do SCS respondents complete the NCVS also? ................................. 4 How many respondents were eligible to receive the 2001 SCS? .................... 4 What was the response rate for the 2001 SCS? .................................. 4 DATA COLLECTION .......................................................... 5 What modes of data collection were used to administer the 2001 SCS questionnaire? . . . 5 What percent of SCS interviews were collected using PAPI? ...................... 5 Were interviews conducted by self-response?................................... 5 Were proxy interviews conducted? ........................................... 5 Who can serve as a proxy respondent? ........................................ 5 What circumstances warranted a proxy interview? ............................... 6 What about noninterviews? ................................................. 6 How many noninterview persons were there for the 2001 SCS?. .................... 7 Was the SCS administered before or after the NCVS? ............................ 7 Is information provided by SCS respondents confidential? ........................ 7 SCS QUESTIONNAIRE ......................................................... 7 Is the 2001 SCS questionnaire the same as the 1999 questionnaire? ................. 7 What differences exist between the 1999 and 2001 SCS questionnaires? ............. 7 Who developed the 2001 SCS CATI instrument? ................................ 9 Were the 2001 SCS questions tested before implementing them in a production environment? ...................................................... 9 What kind of questions were asked in the 2001 SCS? ............................ 9 How long does it take to complete the SCS Interview? .......................... 10 TRAINING .................................................................. 10 Did interviewers receive special training to conduct the 2001 SCS? ................ 10 Were there differences between the 1999 and 2001 SCS training materials? .......... 10 Was an interviewer debriefing conducted for the 2001 SCS? ...................... 10 Page 1 CHECK-IN .................................................................. 11 What happened to the data after it was collected?............................... 11 What was the PAPI check-in operation? ...................................... 11 CLERICAL EDITING.......................................................... 11 What was the purpose of the clerical edit? .................................... 11 What did the clerical edit consist of for the 2001 SCS? .......................... 12 SCHOOL CODING ............................................................ 13 What was the 2001 SCS School Coding? ..................................... 13 What was the School Name Lookup File?..................................... 13 What is the School Code? ................................................. 14 What were the results of the 2001 SCS School Coding?.......................... 14 DATA KEYING .............................................................. 14 How is the SCS data keyed? ............................................... 14 POST-DATA COLLECTION PROCESSING ....................................... 15 What did the computer processing consist of for the SCS?........................ 15 What was the NCVS/SCS match operation? ................................... 15 What were the results of the match operation? ................................. 15 How was the 2001 SCS data edited? ......................................... 16 What is the "generalized edit system"? ....................................... 16 What types of modules are included in the generalized edits for the 2001 SCS data? . . . 18 What is the advantage of using the generalized editing system?.................... 20 WEIGHTING................................................................. 20 How was the SCS data Weighted?........................................... 20 PUBLIC USE FILE CREATION ................................................. 21 How was the 2001 SCS public use file prepared? ............................... 22 What was the file format? ................................................. 22 Who was responsible for analyzing the results of the SCS? ....................... 22 VARIABLE DESCRIPTION LIST For Household and Person Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .23 For Incident-Level Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .29 CODEBOOK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .99 APPENDIX 1: NCVS QUESTIONNAIRE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .323 APPENDIX 2: SCS 2001 QUESTIONNAIRE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 375 Page 2 2001 SCHOOL CRIME SUPPLEMENT TO THE NATIONAL CRIME VICTIMIZATION SURVEY QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ABOUT THE 2001 SCHOOL CRIME SUPPLEMENT GENERAL INFORMATION What is the 2001 School Crime Supplement? The 2001 School Crime Supplement, or SCS, is a supplemental series of questions asked of eligible National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) household members designed to gather information about school-related victimizations on a national level. What is the purpose of the SCS? The 2001 SCS was an effort to provide information about school-related victimizations on a national level so that policy makers as well as academic researchers, practitioners at the Federal, state, and local levels, and special interest groups who are concerned with crime in schools can make informed decisions concerning this issue. Who sponsors the 2001 SCS? The 2001 SCS was solely sponsored by the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES). The 1995 and 1999 SCS were jointly sponsored by the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) and the NCES. Also, during the first half of 1989, the BJS in conjunction with the National Institute of Justice sponsored the first supplement to the NCVS on school crime. Under what authority is the School Crime Supplement Conducted? Since the 2001 SCS was a supplement to the NCVS, which is sponsored by the BJS, the SCS was conducted under the authority of title 42, United States Code, section 3732. When was the 2001 School Crime Supplement conducted? The 2001 SCS was conducted as a supplement to the NCVS during a 6-month period, from January through June 2001. The 2001 SCS is the fourth of its kind conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau. The SCS was previously conducted as a supplement to the NCVS during the first six months of 1989, 1995, and 1999. Beginning with the 1999 survey, the SCS is conducted as a supplement to the NCVS every two years. The next SCS is scheduled for January through June 2003. Page 3 ELIGIBLE SCS RESPONDENTS Who is eligible for the SCS? Eligible respondents for the 2001 SCS were those household members in all NCVS households including first time in sample households, who: ! were between the ages of 12 and 181 AND ! had attended school at any time during the 6 months preceding the interview AND ! were enrolled in a school which would advance them towards the eventual receipt of a high school diploma. Persons who dropped out of school, who were expelled or suspended from school, or who were temporarily absent from school for any other reason, such as illness or vacation, were eligible for the survey as long as they were attending school at any time during the six months prior to the month of interview. Persons attending home school were also eligible but were only asked questions to determine if they were in a home schooling situation. It was deemed that the other questions in the supplement were not relevant to students attending home schools. Do SCS respondents complete the NCVS also? Yes. These persons were administered the supplemental questions only after their entire NCVS interview was completed. How many respondents were eligible to receive the 2001 SCS? Households in the NCVS sample from January through June 2001 contained 12,534 NCVS respondents eligible for the SCS supplement. What was the response rate for the 2001 SCS? Approximately 77 percent of the eligible respondents completed the SCS interview; the remaining 23 percent were noninterviews. 1 In 1989 and 1995, NCVS sample household members age 12-19 were eligible to receive the supplement. However, it was determined that most 19 year olds did not meet the eligibility criteria of being currently enrolled in a post-secondary school so the upper age range was lowered to 18 for the 1999 and 2001 SCS. Page 4 DATA COLLECTION What modes of data collection were used to administer the 2001 SCS questionnaire? For the NCVS and the SCS, two modes of data collection were used: paper-and-pencil interviewing (PAPI) and computer-assisted telephone interviewing (CATI). In PAPI, households were interviewed in person or by phone. A Census Bureau interviewer either personally visited the sample address and conducted the interview using a paper SCS questionnaire or contacted the household by telephone from the interviewer's home and completed the paper questionnaire over the phone with eligible respondents. In CATI, the interview was conducted by an interviewer calling from a centralized telephone facility and used an automated version of the paper questionnaire, or instrument, to administer the supplement questions and record the respondent's answers. The Census Bureau has three centralized telephone facilities located in Hagerstown, Maryland; Tucson, Arizona; and Jeffersonville, Indiana. For the 2001 SCS, interviewing was conducted in the Hagerstown and Tuscon telephone centers (TCs) since the NCVS is conducted in only those two facilities. What percent of SCS interviews were collected using PAPI? CATI? PAPI was conducted in approximately 70 percent of the households and CATI was conducted in 30 percent of the NCVS eligible households. PAPI may be done by personal visit or by telephone.  Approximately 90 percent of all interviews are conducted by the telephone; the other 10 percent are conducted by personal visit. Were interviews conducted by self-response? Yes. For the most part, interviewers attempted to interview every eligible person in the household by self-response. Were proxy interviews conducted? Yes, there are limited situations in which a proxy interview was acceptable. The same rules applied to the SCS as for the NCVS with regards to proxy interviews. Proxy interviews are interviews conducted in which someone other than the intended household member, who is 18 years or older, answers the questions for another person in the household. For the SCS, household members between the ages of 12 and 18 were interviewed by self-response whenever possible. However, if the interview was a proxy for the NCVS, a proxy interview was accepted for the SCS. Who can serve as a proxy respondent? An eligible proxy respondent is a household member who is at least 18 years old, who is very knowledgeable about the proxy household member, and who has already completed his or her own NCVS interview by self-response. Two exceptions to the age requirement for a proxy respondent Page 5 are when the household’s reference person or one of the other people who owns or rents the home is under 18 years of age, or when all household members are under 18 years of age. On very rare occasions, a nonhousehold member may serve as a proxy respondent. What circumstances warranted a proxy interview? Information was obtained about an individual household member by conducting a proxy interview only under the following circumstances: ! If a child was 12 or 13 years old, a self-response interview should have been obtained. However, if the parents refused to let the interviewer speak to the 12 or 13 year old, a proxy interview was conducted with the parent. ! If a household member between the ages of 12 and 18 was temporarily absent and not expected to return to the sample household at all during the entire interview period, a proxy interview was acceptable. ! If a household member was considered physically or mentally unable to answer the questions, the person must have been unable to be interviewed due to health problems or mental incompetence. This condition must have been continuous during the entire interview period and did not include colds or flu, drunkenness, drug use, or problems that might have been aggravated because the questions were upsetting. What about noninterviews? A noninterview was accepted for the SCS if : ! the respondent was an NCVS noninterview; ! the respondent was an NCVS interview but refused or was unavailable for the SCS interview; ! the respondent was physically or mentally unable to answer the questions and no proxy was available, or ! if an acceptable proxy respondent refused to give a proxy SCS interview. Interviewers were instructed to complete selected items on the SCS questionnaire to identify each type of noninterview. Page 6 How many noninterview persons were there for the 2001 SCS?. Of the 12,534 eligible respondents, there were 2,882 noninterview persons, or 23 percent of the eligible SCS sample. Was the SCS administered before or after the NCVS? The general interview sequence for the SCS was to ask all appropriate NCVS questions of an eligible household member and if eligible for the SCS, ask all appropriate SCS questions before proceeding to the next eligible household member. This was done to avoid impacting the responses to the NCVS. Is information provided by SCS respondents confidential? Yes. Strict confidentiality of individual respondent information is guaranteed by the BJS under title 42, United States Code, sections 3735 and 3789g, and by the Census Bureau under title 13, United States Code, section 9. Only Census Bureau employees sworn to preserve this confidentiality may see the completed questionnaires. SCS QUESTIONNAIRE Is the 2001 SCS questionnaire the same as the 1999 questionnaire? No, but they are similar. The BJS, the NCES, and the Census Bureau jointly designed the survey questionnaire. Some modifications were made to the 1999 questionnaire to form the 2001 SCS questionnaire. What differences exist between the 1999 and 2001 SCS questionnaires? The 2001 SCS added some new questions and changed the wording of some existing questions. A description of the changes to the 2001 SCS follows: Screen Questions ! The screen questions were redesigned and some new questions were added pertaining to respondents who were home schooled. The new questions were designed to collect information about respondents who were home schooled for part of the SCS reference period and to determine their public or private school grade-equivalent. School Environment ! In this section, the 2001 SCS asked about additional safety measures taken by schools not asked about in the 1999 SCS. Page 7 ! Separate questions were asked about the availability of specific types of uppers and downers at school rather than in one general question as was done in the 1999 SCS. ! Questions were added which asked the respondent if they knew of any student who used or sold drugs or alcohol while at school. Fighting, Bullying and Hate Behaviors ! The section entitle “Victimization, Bullying and Hate Crime,” was renamed to “Fighting, Bullying and Hate Behaviors.” ! New questions were added to determine if the respondent had been involved in one or more physical fights at school, and if so, how many times. ! A question was added about having feelings of rejection, being called names, or being excluded from activities caused by other students. ! A question was added to determine if students had experienced a "threat of attack” as a type of victimization. Avoidance ! A new question was added to ask respondents about their fear of a threatened attack by someone at school. Weapons ! A new question was added to determine if students could have gotten a loaded gun without adult supervision either at school or away from school. Gangs ! The introduction statement in the “Gangs” section was modified to better clarify to respondents the definition of a “gang”. ! The question asking if any students at school belong to a gang was removed. ! The questions concerning the presence of gangs at school was reworded to “Are there any gangs at your school?” Page 8 Student Characteristics ! A new section entitled “Student Characteristics” was added to the 2001 SCS. This new section included a question about skipping class, the types of grades the respondent received, and whether the respondent planned on attending school after high school. Who developed the 2001 SCS CATI instrument? The Census Bureau developed the CATI (computer-assisted telephone interviewing) version of the 2001 SCS supplement. The instrument was essentially the same as the PAPI version and was a computer-assisted survey execution system (CASES) instrument. Since the Census Bureau discontinued its use of microCATI in which the 1999 SCS instrument was coded, a new SCS instrument was coded using CASES software for the 2001 SCS. Were the 2001 SCS questions tested before implementing them in a production environment? Most of the questions incorporated in this current supplement were administered in prior SCS surveys, and tested via focus groups and cognitive interviewing. However, because there were new and revised questions on the 2001 SCS, the Census Bureau conducted a small-scale cognitive test of the SCS questionnaire. Based upon the results of the testing, some minor modifications, mostly wording changes, were made to the questionnaire. What kind of questions were asked in the 2001 SCS? The final questionnaire consisted of six different sections. They included: ! Screen Questions - The first section contained the screen questions which were asked to determine if the respondent was eligible for the supplement. ! Environmental Questions - The second section contained the environmental questions that obtained selected information on the type of school, such as whether the school was private or public, grades taught, measures taken by the school to ensure the safety of students, and the availability of drugs in school. ! Fighting, Bullying and Hate Behaviors - The third section contained the victimization questions which identified or distinguished the nature and extent of the crimes. These questions were designed to elicit crimes that occurred only at school, that is, in the school building, on the school grounds, or on a school bus. ! Avoidance - The fourth section contained avoidance questions which identified the effect of fear of school crime on behavior. The avoidance questions were designed to determine if students stayed away from school or particular places at school for fear of being attacked Page 9 or harmed. Students were also asked if they avoided participating in extra-curricular activities at their school for fear that someone might attack or harm them. ! Weapons - The fifth section asked questions pertaining to weapons. The purpose of these questions was to determine accessability for students to obtain weapons and if students brought weapons to school for protection. ! Gangs -The sixth section contained questions relating to the presence of organized gangs at school and whether students came into contact with gangs or gang members at school. How long does it take to complete the SCS Interview? An average SCS interview takes approximately 10 minutes to complete. TRAINING Did interviewers receive special training to conduct the 2001 SCS? Yes. For PAPI and CATI interviewers, the Census Bureau developed separate manuals and self-studies. Training was in the form of a self-administered study guide. The self-study provided basic facts, general procedures, and instructions for conducting the SCS supplement. Classroom training, in which training is administered by an instructor using a verbatim guide in a classroom setting, was not conducted due to cost and time constraints. Additionally, interviewers were provided with an interviewing manual. The manual provided detailed information about the content and administration of the 2001 SCS, covering each item in the questionnaire and addressing concepts related to the SCS. The PAPI self-study and manual also addressed procedures for editing completed SCS questionnaires. Plans are to include the SCS as a permanent separate appendix in the NCVS Field Representative's Manual and CATI Interviewer's manual. Were there differences between the 1999 and 2001 SCS training materials? Aside from differences related to the content of the SCS, the practice exercise format used in the 1999 SCS training material, which provided questions and scenarios for interviewers to resolve, was also used in the 2001 SCS training material. The “practice exercise” format for the self-studies provided a reliable way to address new issues, concepts, and questions the interviewers would possibly encounter during the 2001 SCS interviewing. Was an interviewer debriefing conducted for the 2001 SCS? Yes. Every interviewer who worked on the SCS was asked to complete a debriefing questionnaire. The purpose of the debriefing questionnaire was to obtain the interviewer’s and respondent’s opinions and outlook of the SCS questionnaire, which will be used for further development of the SCS questionnaire. The results are documented in the attached memorandum (Attachment 1). For the 2001 SCS, a copy of the debriefing questionnaire was provided to the interviewers with the Page 10 training materials, so that interviewers were aware of the type of information that was being requested by the survey prior to starting their interviews. CHECK-IN What happened to the data after it was collected? For PAPI, interviewers edited the SCS questionnaires for completeness and accuracy before transmitting them to their respective Census Bureau regional office (RO). In the ROs, the forms were further edited for completeness and accuracy and then sent to the National Processing Center (NPC) in Jeffersonville, Indiana for check-in, clerical editing, and keying. The keyed files were then sent to Census Bureau headquarters for post data-collection processing. For CATI, completed cases were transmitted daily from the Tucson and Hagerstown TCs to headquarters for post data-collection processing. What was the PAPI check-in operation? The first step of the clerical edit was the manual check-in of the paper questionnaires. The check-in is a control function that ensures all shipments are received from each Census Bureau RO and that each shipment is complete. Twelve Census Bureau ROs are located throughout the United States. Each office is responsible for the data collection activities of a survey for a specific, well-defined area or territory. Data collection problems are often referred to the appropriate RO for resolution. A sample number/control number check was also performed to ensure that it was complete and within an acceptable range. The next step required a manual verification of any supplements that were marked as noninterviews. For the 2001 SCS, a new requirement was implemented during check-in of the SCS PAPI questionnaires. Clerical check-in staff were instructed to ensure that every NCVS person age 12-18 had an SCS form completed for them (either interview or noninterview). If not, the staff contacted the appropriate RO to request that an SCS form be completed and shipped to them. Once these functions were complete, the SCS forms were clerically edited. CLERICAL EDITING What was the purpose of the clerical edit? The main purpose of the SCS clerical edit was to locate and correct any interviewer errors made during PAPI data collection and, when possible, correct areas of respondent misunderstanding. Such errors could only be identified by clerical review of the data. Errors were corrected in an effort to improve the accuracy and quality of the data. Page 11 What did the clerical edit consist of for the 2001 SCS? The clerical edit was a step in the processing of the PAPI SCS forms following the check-in that examined the data for certain types of errors. Part of the clerical edit also involved the coding of school names reported in the SCS. Each page of the questionnaire was examined for those interviews conducted using PAPI. There was no clerical edit of the 2001 CATI SCS data except for the school coding operation. Clerical editing was deemed not necessary since edits were built into the CATI instrument and any data errors were corrected at the time of interviewing. Some of the edits performed are described below. For both PAPI and CATI, the editing and/or coding operations were 100 percent verified. This means that all work was checked for corrections. ! Numeric values should have been entered right justified. If the values were not right justified, they were deleted and entered in the right-most boxes. ! If the numeric value was written in alphas, the word(s) were deleted and the appropriate number was entered. For example, if in item 8 there was an entry of "seventh" or 7th, this entry would be deleted and "07" entered, right justified, in the appropriate boxes. ! In some cases a range might have been entered. If this was the case, the midpoint was calculated and the range was deleted, replacing it with the midpoint. ! Write-in entries in "Other-specify" categories were examined to determine if they could be reclassified into one of the precoded categories. ! If the interviewer made a notation that the respondent answered "Don't know," this category was marked, if one was provided. If no such category was provided, the note was deleted and the item left blank. ! If multiple entries were marked where only a single entry was acceptable, the lowest coded (first marked) box was accepted. If SCS forms failed the clerical edit and could not be resolved by NPC staff, they (along with any accompanying NCVS forms) were sent to headquarters staff for resolution during a "referral" process. All resolved SCS referrals and their accompanying NCVS forms were returned to the NPC. These, along with any NCVS forms that did not require referral were separated from the SCS forms and batched for questionnaire keying. The SCS interviews and noninterviews were separated and sorted into batches consisting of approximately 50 supplements each. Page 12 SCHOOL CODING What was the 2001 SCS School Coding? The 2001 SCS coding was performed to assign the state, county, and school code to entries of school name, and city, county and state in which the school the respondent attended is located. These write-in entries are in items 6a and 6b of the 2001 SCS. The Census Bureau created an automated School Name Lookup file which was used by Census Bureau editors to uniquely code the location and name of the school. The 2001 School Name Lookup File was created using two source files: the preliminary 1999-2000 Public School file which was obtained from the Census Bureau's Governments Division and the latest available version of a Private School File from the Consumer Expenditures Programming Branch at the Census Bureau. The Public School file was produced by the Governments Division within the Census Bureau using data collected from the Common Core of Data (CCD) School Non-fiscal Survey sponsored by the Department of Education. The Private School file was obtained from the Consumer Expenditures Programming Branch within the Demographic Surveys Division of the Census Bureau. Data on this file were obtained from the 1999-2000 Private School Survey sponsored by the National Center for Education Statistics. What was the School Name Lookup File? The School Name Lookup File is a SAS data set containing selected variables from a merged Public/Private school file. This subset file contained school identification variables essential for the coding of the school entries. Using this file provided a quick way for the National Processing Center coders to search for state, county, and school codes for schools reported in Item 6a of the SCS. Once found in the lookup file, a unique 12-digit school code, a 5digit county code, and a 2-digit FIPS state code were assigned. If the school name entered could not be located on the lookup file, or if the editor was unsure as to which school code to assign because the information provided by the respondent was incomplete or missing, the case was referred to Census Bureau Headquarters for resolution. Prior to referring a case, coders also had the ability to contact schools if they could locate a telephone number. In some instances contacting a school to verify information about their name and location resulted in clarifying whether the school was the same as that entered in Item 6a. For unresolved cases, staff at Headquarters had available to them the School Coding Lookup File as well. These files were used to attempt to resolve all uncoded school names. In certain instances, school names were misspelled and once searched for using the correct name, were found on the school coding file. Headquarters staff also used the Internet yellow pages listings to locate school names and telephone numbers. Once found, Census Bureau staff were able to verify in some instances that a complete school name was not provided by the respondent, or that the school name changed. For these cases, Census Bureau staff were sometimes able to locate the school name and code on the lookup file. For other instances, Census Bureau staff contacted schools and Page 13 found that they were very recently built or created from the merging of two separate schools, which explained why they were not on the School Code Lookup File. What is the School Code? The School code is a code that uniquely identifies any school in the United States. The variables LEAID and SCHNO on the public school file were used to create a unique 12-digit school code for all schools listed on the file. The variable LEAID is a seven-digit agency code, with the first two digits being the FIPS state code. The variable SCHNO is a five-digit school code. The variable CNTRL_NO on the private school file was used to create a unique school code for all schools listed on the private school file. Since this variable was only eight digits in length, four digits were added to the beginning of the school code to make the length of the private school code consistent with the public school code. The first two digits of the private school code represents the FIPS state code. The second two digits are always zero. What were the results of the 2001 SCS School Coding? 8,601 cases required school coding. Of these, 8,374 or approximately 97 percent of the school name entries were successfully coded. The 1999 SCS also had a 97 percent coding success rate. The high consistent coding rate is attributable to using a version of the public and private school files updated with the latest information on schools as well as emphasizing to the interviewers the importance of collecting complete school name information. DATA KEYING How is the SCS data keyed? Upon completion of the clerical edit, coding, and verification, the questionnaires were transmitted to the Electronic Data Processing unit in Jeffersonville, Indiana for data keying. The questionnaire data were keyed on a key-to-disk device. For control and quality control purposes, work units of approximately 50 questionnaires each were keyed. Questionnaires with different sample designations (J20 and J21) were batched separately from each other and within each sample, interviews were batched separately from noninterviews. The two-digit sample designation code preceded by a "J" is the code assigned to the sample unit when it was selected for the NCVS sample. All SCS data were keyed using a fixed field format. For the NCVS, the data is usually keyed in a Source Code/Data format with each data field consisting of a three-digit source code and six digits of data. The data then goes through a conversion during computer processing to put it into a fixed field format. By keying the SCS data in a fixed field format, which is more difficult for the data keyers since every item in the questionnaire has to be keyed even if it does not contain an entry, a step was saved in later processing to reformat the data to a fixed location on the file. Because the data were keyed in a fixed field format, various field edits were performed on the data as it was being keyed to ensure that the record was keyed correctly. A quality control measure was employed to ensure an acceptable level of quality of keying. All keying was verified on a 100 Page 14 percent basis. Upon completion of keying and verification, the data for each work unit were read to tape and transmitted to Census Bureau Headquarters for computer processing. POST-DATA COLLECTION PROCESSING What did the computer processing consist of for the SCS? The computer processing involved multiple steps. One of the first steps was the merging of the SCS CATI answer files with the keyed questionnaire file. Prior to merging the two files, the CATI file was reformatted to the format of the questionnaire file. Following this, there was an NCVS/SCS match operation. What was the NCVS/SCS match operation? The next step of computer processing, the match operation, was the matching of the fully edited, unweighted NCVS data files for quarters 1 and 2, 2001 to the unedited, unweighted SCS quarterly data files. Only NCVS households with household members aged 12-18 were matched to the SCS file. The purpose of the match was to identify "unmatched records" at the household level using control number as the variable to match. These are records in which there was an NCVS household record with no matching SCS record or an SCS record with no matching NCVS record. Separate listings of the NCVS and SCS unmatched households were produced and the mismatches were clerically reviewed for resolution by Census Bureau staff. If an NCVS household matched to an SCS household, a subsequent match was conducted on person line number and age for each person within the household. Person line number and age mismatches were also clerically reviewed for resolution. What were the results of the match operation? In the majority of the person mismatched cases, the line number and the age discrepancies were corrected to agree with the NCVS. In a very small number of cases, the ages on the NCVS file, those that had been allocated during the regular editing of the NCVS data, were changed to agree with the ages on the SCS file. For these persons, the ages on the SCS file were considered correct. In addition, eligible persons on the NCVS file for which no SCS was administered were added to the SCS file as an SCS noninterview. The SCS records which did not match to an NCVS record were dropped from the file. The following is a count of the number of NCVS persons age 12-18 from January through June 2001, the number of SCS records received, the number of SCS persons that matched to an NCVS household/person, and the number of SCS records that were deleted (nonmatches). After the match operation, the NCVS and SCS files were merged and the post data collection processing of the SCS data was initiated. Page 15 January - June 2001 NCVS Persons 12-18 SCS Persons % SCS Matches to TOTAL eligible NCVS persons 12-18 Matches 12,534 12,534 Nonmatches 64 158 TOTAL 12,598 12,692 99.5% For the entire six month period, 64 NCVS persons age 12-18 did not match on line number and/or age to an SCS person record. 158 SCS persons did not match to an NCVS person, so these SCS records were deleted. Of these 158 SCS persons deleted, 46 PAPI cases were deleted due to their corresponding NCVS interview not being keyed. This problem occurred when keyers accidentally stapled the pages of the PAPI NCVS-1 questionnaire together that contained the person data for these respondents. This resulted in the NCVS data for these persons not being keyed, nor subsequently matched to the corresponding SCS data. As a result, these SCS records were deleted during the match operation. Of these 46 PAPI cases, 14 were SCS interviews and the remaining 32 cases were SCS noninterviews. How was the 2001 SCS data edited? For the 2001 SCS editing, a generalized edit system was used to perform computer edits. This system was first implemented with the processing of the 1999 SCS questionnaire. What is the "generalized edit system"? Generalized Edit Modules The generalized edits included within the Generalized Survey Data Processing System are designed to identify (not correct) response errors and compilation errors. The processing system is designed and developed around the concept of edit modularity. An edit module is comprised of a discrete process or group of processes (a single task), it is physically and operationally a separate component. An edit module accepts input in a pre-specified format, it performs a SINGLE task against the input, and produces output also in a pre-specified format. Each edit module performs a 'generalized' function. It is generalized in that it performs an identical singular task against any input provided and produces output based upon the impact of the process against the input data. The edit module is input independent and it performs identically regardless of the data item used as input. It does not treat any data item as inherently unique. These generalized modules read tables which provide the list of data items on which the generalized edit function is to be performed. These tables, or locations where the edit module are to be executed, are provided by the system user. Page 16 Modules can be grouped to form a 'class' of operations. The edit is an operational class, the modules within the class might be described as presence tests, range tests, skip-pattern tests, balance tests, consistency tests, etc. The system designer (generalized system user) determines which survey data items are included in the table for a given class of edits. A range test is an example of a module. It performs a single function against any data item used as input, it validates that the value of the data item is within a pre-specified range of values, where the range is provided by the survey designer (generalized system user) and is stored in a table. If the value of the data item is within the specified range it is considered valid, if it is outside the specified range it is invalid. Why are modularity and generalization important? Modularization is the key component to structured programming. Some of the advantages of structured programming are (1) a formalized system design; (2) expedient development of code; (3) reduction of coding errors; (4) portability of modules; (5) system design changes are more easily implemented; (6) the developed code is easier to navigate; and, (7) new modules are easily added to a system with little disruption of existing code. Generalization facilitates the incorporation of processing standards. A generalized module can be constructed based upon the knowledge of an 'expert'. The experts’ procedure is embedded in the code. The module is designed to process any data inputs and is portable thus, can be used on multiple surveys - it becomes a standard. Once survey processing standards are widely implemented then the disparities across surveys of processing techniques and procedures will be minimized. New generalized edit modules can easily be added to the system. If a survey designer for a specific survey can specify a table driven algorithm, then that can be incorporated into the system. All that is required is that the specified edit operate identically across any data item used as input to the module. Hierarchical Processing Each observation is processed in a predetermined order based upon the logic of the tests performed. The observation record is NOT processed from data item 1 through data item n. It is processed in logical order based upon the sequence of specified tasks (modules). The ordering of predetermined tasks is predefined by the survey designer. The processing of operational classes and modules determines the order in which data items are processed. All specified (in a table) data items are processed through module 1 before proceeding to process all applicable data items by module number 2. However, the order in which data items are processed within a module does not need to begin with data item number 1 and proceed sequentially to the last data item. The survey designer determines the order in which the data items are processed by a module. Page 17 The system user has complete control of which generalized edits are executed against which class of observations. For example, the system user could execute a subset of range tests against all observations where age is 12 through 15. The system user can interactively activate and deactivate individual edit tests and can use where clauses to specify subsets of observations to be included in the execution of the edit routines. Sequential Processing The input data file is processed sequentially from beginning to end one observation at a time. The current observation is processed through the system as far as possible before processing begins on the next observation. Again, the system user can specify which observations are included in any execution of any edit routine or routines. What types of modules are included in the generalized edits for the 2001 SCS data? Currently, the Generalized Survey Data Processing System includes a battery of generalized edit modules. The following modules were used for editing the 2001 SCS data: Required Data Item Test The purpose of this test was to validate that data items that must be present were in fact present, evidenced by the fact that the data item did not contain the missing value code (.) as the data value. Required data items are those data items which MUST be completed by ALL respondents. If a required data item contains a missing value, there is an error. Note, that many data items are conditionally required, that is required based upon a previous skip instruction. These types of required data items are not to be validated by this test. Conditional required data items are tested via the skip instruction edits. Range Test The purpose of this edit test was to validate that the data values present were within tolerance for the given data item. If the data value was either too large or too small, then the data item was identified as in error. Range tests are typically only performed against continuous data items, not against discrete data items. All data can be typed as either character or numeric. The generalized edit modules currently included within the generalized system operate against only numeric data. Numeric data can be further classified as either discrete, or continuous. Continuous numeric data items can assume any real (floating point) numeric value within a given range. For example, a continuous data item may exhibit data values from 0 through 100. Included within in this range would be all integer values (i.e. 1, 2, 3 ... 100), AND all real values (i.e. 1.1, 1.2, etc.). Dollar value entries are continuous, as are most scientific measurements. Page 18 Discrete data items only allow distinct data values. These discrete data items include only a predetermined list of possible data values (i.e. 1, 2, 3, and 4). The check box entries included in most Census Surveys are discrete data items, as they can assume only a distinct number of predefined data values. In general, range tests are performed on continuous data items and list-directed edits are performed on discrete data items. This edit verifies that the specified data item has a value that is both greater than or equal to the specified minimum value and less than or equal to the specified maximum value. A missing value code is assumed to be an acceptable data value. The system user provides a minimum and maximum value for each data item tested by the range edit. Note, that the specified inclusive range includes all values that would be found on a number line segment bounded by the two specified values (minimum and maximum). Thus, real numbers are considered valid. Skip Pattern Validation Tests The purpose of the Skip Pattern Validation Tests was to determine if the data values of skip items were consistent with the skip instructions as given on the questionnaire. These edits are often referred to as “consistency tests.” A skip instruction qualifies a respondent to provide information on a topic covered within a survey. The skip instruction ascertains if the respondent exhibited a behavior encompassed by the specific survey subsection. If the respondent positively indicates that the behavior covered in the survey subsection is germane then additional questions are asked of the respondent. If the skip instruction determines that the subsection is not germane then the subsection is skipped. Note, that skip instructions often do not simply receive yes or no responses. Often the responses to skip instructions are more involved and may include a wider range of permissible responses. List Directed Edits The purpose of a list directed edit was to validate that the data value for a specified data item exactly matched one of the data values on a specified list. The list contained all the valid data values that the specified data item could assume and be considered to be valid. If the specified data items' data value was not contained on the list then that data item was invalid. Survey Rules Validation The purpose of these tests were to validate COMPLEX inter-item relationships within an observation. These tests determine if the specified relationships between data items are true. If the statement is false then there is an error situation. These tests validate that expressions are valid, not that individual data items are valid. The tests validate an inter-item relationship, which is mathematical or logical. If the relationship is false then either the left hand side or the right hand of the expression is in error. The system cannot determine the cause of the error, as the relationship is in error not the individual data items. The algorithms for survey rules validation are provided as expressions. These expressions are saved in an external file and are read and executed in sequential order. If the expression is true (if Page 19 the mathematical or conditional statement is valid) then there is an error situation. If the expression is false then there is no error situation. Blanking Edit After the generalized edit modules were complete, the data were passed through a blanking edit. This edit checked to make sure that the case followed the appropriate skip pattern by stepping sequentially through the items. It deleted entries that should not have been filled. An "out-of-universe" code was assigned to all items that failed the edit. The "out-of-universe" code assigned to items that should have been blank consist of a "9" in each position of the multiple field for that item. For example, item 2 should be blank when the response in item 1 is "no". On the data file, the value in item 2 would be "99". What is the advantage of using the generalized editing system? Using the generalized system reduced the processing time because to development of separate formal edit specifications for each separate stage in the post-data collection processing is eliminated. The generalized editing program also allows for the quick and easy creation of edits via modules and allows an analyst to produce reports of summary editing results. WEIGHTING How was the SCS data Weighted? After all editing was completed, the weighting process began. Modifications to the regular NCVS weighting program were necessary in order for the weighting of the SCS file. The NCVS data had to be weighted twice: once including continuing rotations only and once including all rotations (incoming and continuing rotations). Incoming rotations are those households in which it is the first time we are conducting an NCVS interview. Continuing rotations are those households that have been interviewed before and are now in the next enumeration period. Modified weighting procedures were necessary because of the following differences between SCS and NCVS: ! The eligible population for SCS differs from the eligible population for NCVS. ! A person can respond to the NCVS and not the SCS. ! For select SCS items, the incoming rotation (first time interview) contributes to the estimates as well as continuing rotations. For the NCVS, only continuing rotations contribute to the estimates. Households in the incoming rotation (first time interviews) are not included in the NCVS estimates since the data for these cases are "unbounded". The purpose of the initial interview is for purposes of bounding, that is, to learn about all crimes occurring previously in order to keep the respondent from reporting them in subsequent interviews. Data obtained in the initial interview are, therefore, not used for computing NCVS victimization estimates. Page 20 In the NCVS weighting process, adjustments were made to account for both household and person noninterviews. Additional adjustment factors were applied to reduce the variance of the estimate by correcting for differences between the distribution of the sample by age, race, and sex and the distribution of the population by these characteristics. This also reduced the bias due to under coverage of various portions of the population. Weights were assigned to all interviewed households on the file and, within the household, to all interviewed persons. A special weighting adjustment was performed on the SCS data. Noninterview adjustment factors were computed to adjust the weighting for SCS noninterviews. Two SCS person weights were computed as a result of applying special adjustment factors to the NCVS final person weight. ! The first SCS weight computed was derived using the final NCVS person weight that was calculated for all interviewed persons in interviewed continuing households and applying a within-SCS noninterview adjustment factor. This weight, which should be used if producing NCVS estimates using only the continuing rotations, is located in the NCVS section of the NCVS/SCS person record. ! The second SCS weight was derived using the final NCVS person weight that was calculated for all interviewed persons in interviewed continuing and incoming households with a within-SCS noninterview adjustment factor applied. This weight, which should be used if producing SCS estimates using all rotations, is located in the SCS section of the NCVS/SCS person record. PUBLIC USE FILE CREATION Once all computer processing and weighting was completed, a 6-month NCVS/SCS public use file was created. ! Record type 001, which is the address record and consists of limited information about the household. ! Record type 002 contains the entire NCVS household record. ! Record type 003 contains the entire NCVS person record which was expanded from the 1999 SCS, to include the 2001 SCS information. ! Record type 004 contains the entire incident record information for up to 7 incidents. The file contained one record for each SCS eligible household member (age 12-18) with an expanded incident record to include information for all NCVS incidents reported by that person in the same record. To determine the number of incidents to allow for in this expanded incident record frequencies of incidents reported for SCS persons during the 2001 SCS were prepared. Based on the frequencies the maximum number of incidents reported by an SCS person during January through June 2001 was 7. To accommodate this information in one record the incident record type 004 was expanded to allow for 7 incidents. Page 21 How was the 2001 SCS public use file prepared? Prior to its release, the file was reviewed by the Census Bureau's Disclosure Review Board (DRB) to ensure that the contents of the file did not violate any disclosure avoidance measures. For confidentiality protection of the public use file, recoding procedures and a control number scrambling routine were performed before the file was released for public use. When creating the 2001 NCVS/SCS file a control number scrambling routine that was different from the NCVS control number scrambling routine was used to prevent matching the two files. In addition, data that may have provided geographic information by inference were blanked because of data confidentiality reasons. Although the school attended was uniquely coded, the DRB mandated that this code be suppressed to avoid disclosure of information about any one individual. What was the file format? The file was prepared on CD-ROM. Who was responsible for analyzing the results of the SCS? The BJS and the NCES were responsible for statistical analysis and publication of the data from the 2001 SCS. Page 22 VARIABLE DESCRIPTION LIST For Household and Person Variables Var Description Location V1 SAMPLE NUMBER 1-2 V2 SCRAMBLED CONTROL NUMBER 3-16 V3 HOUSEHOLD NUMBER 17-17 V4 PANEL OR ROTATION GROUP 18-19 V5 YEAR AND QUARTER 20-22 V6 UNIT STATUS 23-23 V7 HOUSEHOLD STATUS 24-24 V8 LINE NUMBER OF HOUSEHOLD RESPONDENT 25-26 V9 SPECIAL PLACE/GROUP QUARTERS TYPE CODE 27-28 V10 TENURE (ORIGINAL) 29-29 V11 TENURE (ALLOCATED) 30-30 V12 LAND USE (ORIGINAL) 31-31 V13 LAND USE (ALLOCATED) 32-32 V14 FARM SALES (ORIGINAL) 33-33 V15 FARM SALES (ALLOCATED) 34-34 V16 TYPE OF LIVING QUARTERS (ORIGINAL) 35-36 V17 TYPE OF LIVING QUARTERS (ALLOCATED) 37-38 V18 LOCATION OF PHONE 39-39 V19 IS PHONE INTERVIEW ACCEPTABLE? 40-40 V20 NUMBER OF HOUSING UNITS IN STRUCTURE 41-42 V21 DIRECT OUTSIDE ACCESS 43-43 V22 HOUSEHOLD INCOME 44-45 V23 MONTH NONINTERVIEW COMPLETED 46-47 V24 DAY NONINTERVIEW COMPLETED 48-49 V25 YEAR NONINTERVIEW COMPLETED 50-51 V26 REASON FOR HOUSEHOLD NONINTERVIEW 52-53 V27 RACE OF HOUSEHOLD HEAD (TYPE A) 54-54 V28 PRINC: RELATIONSHIP TO REFERENCE PERSON 55-56 V29 PRINC: AGE LAST BIRTHDAY (ALLOCATED) 57-58 V30 PRINC: MARITAL STATUS THIS SURVEY PERIOD 59-59 V31 PRINC: MARITAL STATUS LAST SURVEY PERIOD 60-60 V32 PRINC: SEX (ALLOCATED) 61-61 V33 PRINC: ARMED FORCES MEMBER 62-62 V34 PRINC: EDUCATION(HIGHEST GRADE ATTENDED) 63-64 V35 PRINC: EDUCATION(THAT YEAR COMPLETED?) 65-65 V36 PRINC: RACE (ALLOCATED) 66-66 V37 PRINC: HISPANIC ORIGIN 67-67 V38 REFER: AGE LAST BIRTHDAY (ALLOCATED) 68-69 V39 REFER: MARITAL STATUS THIS SURVEY PERIOD 70-70 V40 REFER: MARITAL STATUS LAST SURVEY PERIOD 71-71 V41 REFER: SEX (ALLOCATED) 72-72 V42 REFER: ARMED FORCES MEMBER 73-73 V43 REFER: EDUCATION(HIGHEST GRADE ATTENDED?) 74-75 V44 REFER: EDUCATION(THAT YEAR COMPLETED?) 76-76 V45 REFER: RACE (ALLOCATED) 77-77 V46 REFER: HISPANIC ORIGIN 78-78 V47 1ST PERSON PROXY INTERVIEW OBTAINED FOR 79-80 V48 LINE NUMBER OF 1ST PROXY RESPONDENT 81-82 V49 REASON FOR 1ST PROXY INTERVIEW 83-83 V50 2ND PERSON PROXY INTERVIEW OBTAINED FOR 84-85 V51 LINE NUMBER OF 2ND PROXY RESPONDENT 86-87 V52 REASON FOR 2ND PROXY INTERVIEW 88-88 V53 3RD PERSON PROXY INTERVIEW OBTAINED FOR 89-90 V54 LINE NUMBER OF 3RD PROXY RESPONDENT 91-92 V55 REASON FOR 3RD PROXY INTERVIEW 93-93 Page 23  V56 4TH PERSON PROXY INTERVIEW OBTAINED FOR 94-95 V57 LINE NUMBER OF 4TH PROXY RESPONDENT 96-97 V58 REASON FOR 4TH PROXY INTERVIEW 98-98 V59 LINE NUMBER OF 1ST TYPE Z NONINTERVIEW 99-100 V60 REASON FOR 1ST TYPE Z NONINTERVIEW 101-101 V61 LINE NUMBER OF 2ND TYPE Z NONINTERVIEW 102-103 V62 REASON FOR 2ND TYPE Z NONINTERVIEW 104-104 V63 LINE NUMBER OF 3RD TYPE Z NONINTERVIEW 105-106 V64 REASON FOR 3RD TYPE Z NONINTERVIEW 107-107 V65 LINE NUMBER OF 4TH TYPE Z NONINTERVIEW 108-109 V66 REASON FOR 4TH TYPE Z NONINTERVIEW 110-110 V67 NUMBER OF HOUSEHOLD MEMBERS 12 AND OVER 111-112 V68 NUMBER OF HOUSEHOLD MEMBERS UNDER 12 113-114 V69 NUMBER OF CRIME INCIDENT REPORTS FILLED 115-116 V70 OPERATE A BUSINESS FROM THIS ADDRESS? 117-117 V71 IS THE BUSINESS CLEARLY MARKED? 118-118 V72 ANY INCIDENTS OF ILLEGAL ENTRY? 119-119 V73 HOW MANY TIMES? 120-122 V74 TOTAL # OF VEHICLES OWNED-LAST 6 MONTHS 123-123 V75 ANY INCIDENTS W/ VEHICLE-LAST 6 MONTHS? 124-124 V76 HOW MANY TIMES? 125-127 V77 ANYONE VANDALIZED PROP-LAST 6 MONTHS? 128-128 V78 LI WHAT WAS DAMAGED OR DESTROYED? 129-129 V79 C MOTOR VEHICLE (INCLUDING PARTS) 130-130 V80 C BICYCLE (INCLUDING PARTS) 131-131 V81 C MAILBOX 132-132 V82 C HOUSE WINDOW/SCREEN/DOOR 133-133 V83 C YARD OR GARDEN (TREES, SHRUBS, FENCE) 134-134 V84 C FURNITURE, OTHER HOUSEHOLD GOODS 135-135 V85 C CLOTHING 136-136 V86 C ANIMAL (PET, LIVESTOCK, ETC.) 137-137 V87 C OTHER 138-138 V88 RESIDUE WHAT WAS DAMAGED OR DESTROYED? 139-139 V89 LI WHAT KIND OF DAMAGE WAS DONE? 140-140 V90 C BROKEN GLASS 141-141 V91 C DEFACED: MARRED, GRAFFITI, DIRTIED 142-142 V92 C BURNED: USE OF FIRE, HEAT OR EXPLOSIVES 143-143 V93 C DROVE INTO OR RAN OVER WITH VEHICLE 144-144 V94 C OTHER BREAKING OR TEARING 145-145 V95 C INJURED OR KILLED ANIMALS 146-146 V96 C OTHER 147-147 V97 RESIDUE WHAT KIND OF DAMAGE WAS DONE? 148-148 V98 TOTAL DOLLAR AMOUNT OF THE DAMAGE 149-153 V99 WAS THE DAMAGE UNDER $100 OR MORE? 154-154 V100 ATTACKED OR THREATENED, SOMETHING STOLEN 155-155 V101 HOW MANY TIMES? 156-158 V102 CATI GROUP 159-159 V103 HOUSEHOLD WEIGHT 160-171 V104 PSEUDOSTRATUM CODE 172-174 V105 STANDARD ERROR COMPUTATION UNIT CODE 175-175 V106 COLLEGE/UNIVERSITY 176-176 V107 PUBLIC HOUSING 177-177 V108 MANAGER VERIFICATION OF PUBLIC HOUSING 178-178 V109 FAMILY STRUCTURE CODES 179-180 V110 HOUSEHOLD INTERVIEW CODE 181-181 V111 INCOMING OR CONTINUING ROTATIONS 182-182 V112 LAND USE 183-183 V113 PLACE SIZE CODE OF RESIDENCE 184-185 V114 REGION 186-186 V115 TYPE OF SEGMENT 187-187 V116 MSA STATUS 188-188 V117 MONTH ALLOCATED 189-190 Page 24 V118 YEAR ALLOCATED 191-192 V119 PRINCIPLE PERSON ATTENDING SCHOOL 193-193 V120 REFERENCE PERSON ATTENDING SCHOOL 194-194 V121 FIRST PERSON'S LINE NUMBER 195-196 V122 FIRST PERSON'S HH COMPOSITION CODE 197-198 V123 SECOND PERSON'S LINE NUMBER 199-200 V124 SECOND PERSON'S HH COMPOSITION CODE 201-202 V125 THIRD PERSON'S LINE NUMBER 203-204 V126 THIRD PERSON'S HH COMPOSITION CODE 205-206 V127 FOURTH PERSON'S LINE NUMBER 207-208 V128 FOURTH PERSON'S HH COMPOSITION CODE 209-210 V129 INDIAN RESERVATION OR INDIAN LANDS 211-211 V130 FOUR DIGIT YEAR 212-215 V131 LINE NUMBER 216-217 V132 TYPE OF INTERVIEW 218-218 V133 RELATIONSHIP TO REFERENCE PERSON 219-220 V134 AGE LAST BIRTHDAY (ORIGINAL) 221-222 V135 AGE LAST BIRTHDAY (ALLOCATED) 223-224 V136 MARITAL STATUS THIS SURVEY PERIOD 225-225 V137 MARITAL STATUS LAST SURVEY PERIOD 226-226 V138 SEX (ORIGINAL) 227-227 V139 SEX (ALLOCATED) 228-228 V140 ARMED FORCES MEMBER 229-229 V141 HIGHEST GRADE ATTENDED 230-231 V142 WAS THAT YEAR COMPLETED 232-232 V143 RACE (ORIGINAL) 233-233 V144 RACE (ALLOCATED) 234-234 V145 HISPANIC ORIGIN 235-235 V146 MONTH INTERVIEW COMPLETED 236-237 V147 DAY INTERVIEW COMPLETED 238-239 V148 YEAR INTERVIEW COMPLETED 240-241 V149 MONTHS LIVED AT THIS ADDRESS? 242-243 V150 YEARS LIVED AT THIS ADDRESS? 244-245 V151 TIMES MOVED IN THE LAST 5 YEARS 246-247 V152 WAS SOMETHING BELONGING TO YOU STOLEN 248-248 V153 HOW MANY TIMES? 249-251 V154 ANY INCIDENTS OF ILLEGAL ENTRY? 252-252 V155 HOW MANY TIMES? 253-255 V156 ANY STOLEN VEHICLES OR VEHICLE PARTS? 256-256 V157 HOW MANY TIMES? 257-259 V158 ATTACKED OR THREATENED, SOMETHING STOLEN 260-260 V159 HOW MANY TIMES? 261-263 V160 ATTACKS/THREATS OR USE OF FORCE OR WEAPON? 264-264 V161 HOW MANY TIMES? 265-267 V162 ATTACKS/THREATS/THEFT BY SOMEONE YOU KNOW 268-268 V163 HOW MANY TIMES? 269-271 V164 FORCED INTO UNWANTED SEXUAL ACTIVITY 272-272 V165 HOW MANY TIMES? 273-275 V166 CALLED THE POLICE TO REPORT SOMETHING 276-276 V167 FIRST INCIDENT 277-278 V168 SECOND INCIDENT 279-280 V169 THIRD INCIDENT 281-282 V170 ATTACKED OR THREATENED, SOMETHING STOLEN 283-283 V171 HOW MANY TIMES? 284-286 V172 CRIME UNREPORTED TO THE POLICE? 287-287 V173 FIRST INCIDENT 288-289 V174 SECOND INCIDENT 290-291 V175 THIRD INCIDENT 292-293 V176 ATTACKED OR THREATENED, SOMETHING STOLEN 294-294 V177 HOW MANY TIMES? 295-297 V178 LI WHO WAS PRESENT WHEN QUESTIONS ASKED? 298-298 V179 C TELEPHONE INTERVIEW 299-299 Page 25 V180 C NO ONE BESIDES RESPONDENT PRESENT 300-300 V181 C RESPONDENT'S SPOUSE 301-301 V182 C HOUSEHOLD MEMBER(S) 12+, NOT SPOUSE 302-302 V183 C HOUSEHOLD MEMBER(S) UNDER 12 303-303 V184 C NONHOUSEHOLD MEMBER(S) 304-304 V185 C SOMEONE WAS PRESENT - CAN'T SAY WHO 305-305 V186 C DON'T KNOW IF SOMEONE ELSE WAS PRESENT 306-306 V187 RESIDUE WHO WAS PRESENT WHEN QUESTIONS ASKED? 307-307 V188 PROXY RESPONDENT HELPED WITH QUESTIONS 308-308 V189 DID YOU HAVE A JOB LAST WEEK? 309-309 V190 DID YOU HAVE A JOB IN THE LAST 6 MONTHS? 310-310 V191 JOB THAT LASTED 2 CONSEC WEEKS OR MORE? 311-311 V192 WHICH BEST DESCRIBES YOUR JOB? 312-313 V193 IS YOUR JOB WITH -314-314 V194 AT WORK, DO YOU WORK MOSTLY IN -315-315 V195 HOUSEHOLD RESPONDENT 316-316 V196 EMPLOYED BY A COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY? 317-317 V197 ATTENDING COLLEGE 318-318 V198 SCS PERSON WEIGHT 319-330 V199 # INCIDENT REPORTS FILLED FOR HOUSEHOLD 331-332 V200 FOUR DIGIT YEAR 333-336 V201 PERSON NUMBER (WITHIN A HOUSEHOLD) 337-338 V202 TOTAL NUMBER OF PERSONS IN THE HOUSEHOLD 339-340 V203 TOTAL NO. OF INCIDENTS FOR THAT PERSON 341-342 V204 FIRST OCCURRENCE OF THIS HOUSEHOLD 343-343 V205 FIRST OCCURRENCE OF A PERSON IN HH 344-344 V206 RESPONDENT LINE NO. 345-346 V207 RESPONDENT AGE 347-348 V208 TYPE OF SCS INTERVIEW 349-349 V209 REASON FOR SCS NONINTERVIEW 350-350 V210 YOU ATTEND SCHOOL IN THE LAST 6 MONTHS? 351-351 V211 WERE YOU EVER HOME-SCHOOLED? 352-352 V212 WAS ALL OR SOME OF THAT HOME SCHOOLING? 353-353 V213 WHAT GRADE WOULD YOU BE IN? 354-355 V214 WHAT GRADE WERE YOU IN SCHOOL? 356-357 V215 MONTH CURRENT SCHOOL YEAR BEGAN? 358-358 V216 ATTENDED SCHOOL ALL OF LAST 6 MONTHS? 359-359 V217 MONTHS IN SCHOOL DURING LAST 6 MONTHS? 360-360 V218 IS YOUR SCHOOL PUBLIC OR PRIVATE? 361-361 V219 IS THIS YOUR REGULARLY ASSIGNED SCHOOL? 362-362 V220 IS YOUR SCHOOL CHURCH-RELATED? 363-363 V221 IS YOUR SCHOOL CATHOLIC? 364-364 V222 LOWEST GRADE TAUGHT IN YOUR SCHOOL? 365-366 V223 HIGHEST GRADE TAUGHT IN YOUR SCHOOL? 367-368 V224 HOW DO YOU GET TO SCHOOL? 369-369 V225 HOW LONG DOES IT TAKE TO GET TO SCHOOL? 370-370 V226 HOW DO YOU GET HOME FROM SCHOOL? 371-371 V227 STUDENTS ALLOWED LEAVE SCHOOL FOR LUNCH? 372-372 V228 HOW OFTEN DO YOU LEAVE SCHOOL FOR LUNCH? 373-373 V229 PARTICIPATED IN EXTRA-CURRICULARS? 374-374 V230 SCHOOL HAS SECURITY GUARDS OR POLICE? 375-375 V231 OTHER ADULTS SUPERVISING THE HALLWAY? 376-376 V232 METAL DETECTORS? 377-377 V233 LOCKED ENTRANCE OR EXIT DOORS? 378-378 V234 A REQUIREMENT THAT VISITORS SIGN IN? 379-379 V235 LOCKER CHECKS? 380-380 V236 STUDENTS WEAR IDENTIFICATION? 381-381 V237 SECURITY CAMERAS TO MONITOR THE SCHOOL? 382-382 V238 A CODE OF STUDENT CONDUCT? 383-383 V239 YOU AGREE: EVERYONE KNOWS SCHOOL RULES 384-384 V240 YOU AGREE: THE SCHOOL RULES ARE FAIR 385-385 V241 YOU AGREE: PUNISHMENTS EVEN FOR ALL 386-386 Page 26 V242 YOU AGREE: SCHOOL RULES STRICTLY ENFORCED 387-387 V243 YOU AGREE: STUDENTS KNOW PUNISHMENTS 388-388 V244 ATTND DRUG ED CLASS AT SCHOOL-LAST 6 MOS? 389-389 V245 CAN YOU GET ALCOHOL AT YOUR SCHOOL? 390-390 V246 CAN YOU GET MARIJUANA AT YOUR SCHOOL? 391-391 V247 CAN YOU GET CRACK AT YOUR SCHOOL? 392-392 V248 CAN YOU GET OTH FORMS OF COCAINE AT SCHOOL? 393-393 V249 CAN YOU GET UPPERS/OTHER ILLEGAL STIMULANTS? 394-394 V250 CAN YOU GET DOWNERS AT YOUR SCHOOL? 395-395 V251 CAN YOU GET LSD OR ACID AT YOUR SCHOOL? 396-396 V252 CAN YOU GET PCP OR ANGEL DUST AT SCHOOL? 397-397 V253 CAN YOU GET HEROIN OR SMACK AT YOUR SCHOOL? 398-398 V254 CAN YOU GET OTHER ILLEGAL DRUGS AT SCHOOL? 399-399 V255 EASY TO GET ALCOHOL AT YOUR SCHOOL? 400-400 V256 EASY TO GET MARIJUANA AT YOUR SCHOOL? 401-401 V257 EASY TO GET CRACK AT YOUR SCHOOL? 402-402 V258 EASY TO GET OTHER FORMS OF COCAINE AT SCHOOL? 403-403 V259 EASY TO GET UPPERS/OTHER ILLEGAL STIMULANTS? 404-404 V260 EASY TO GET DOWNERS SUCH AS GHB/SLEEP PILL? 405-405 V261 EASY TO GET LSD OR ACID AT YOUR SCHOOL? 406-406 V262 EASY TO GET PCP OR ANGEL DUST AT SCHOOL? 407-407 V263 EASY TO GET HEROIN OR SMACK AT SCHOOL? 408-408 V264 EASY TO GET OTHER ILLEGAL DRUGS AT SCHOOL? 409-409 V265 STUDENTS ON DRUGS AT SCHOOL-LAST 6 MOS? 410-410 V266 BEEN OFFERED ILL DRUG AT SCHOOL-LAST 6 MOS? 411-411 V267 BEEN IN PHYS FIGHTS AT SCHOOL-LAST 6 MOS? 412-412 V268 TIMES IN PHYS FIGHT AT SCHOOL-LAST 6 MOS? 413-415 V269 BEEN BULLIED AT SCHOOL-LAST 6 MOS? 416-416 V270 FELT REJECTED BY OTH STUDENTS-LAST 6 MOS? 417-417 V271 MADE FUN/CALLED NAMES/EXCLUDED-LAST 6 MOS? 418-418 V272 CALLED DEROGATORY NAME AT SCHL-LAST 6 MOS? 419-419 V273 ANY OF THE HATE-WORDS RELATED TO RACE? 420-420 V274 ANY OF HATE-WORDS RELATED TO YOUR RELIGION? 421-421 V275 HATE-WORDS TO YOUR ETHNIC/NATIONAL ORIGIN? 422-422 V276 HATE-WORDS FOR A DISABILITY YOU MAY HAVE? 423-423 V277 ANY OF HATE-WORDS RELATED TO YOUR GENDER? 424-424 V278 HATE-WORDS FOR YOUR SEXUAL ORIENTATION? 425-425 V279 SEEN HATE-WRDS/SYMBLS IN SCHOOL-LAST 6 MOS? 426-426 V280 STAY AWAY FROM SHORTEST ROUTE TO SCHOOL? 427-427 V281 STAY AWAY FROM THE ENTRANCE INTO SCHOOL? 428-428 V282 STAY AWAY FROM HALLWAYS/STAIRS IN SCHOOL? 429-429 V283 STAY AWAY FROM PARTS OF SCHOOL CAFETERIA? 430-430 V284 STAY AWAY FROM ANY SCHOOL RESTROOMS? 431-431 V285 STAY AWAY FROM OTH PLACES IN SCHOOL BUILD? 432-432 V286 STAY AWAY FROM SCHOOL PARKING LOT? 433-433 V287 STAY AWAY FROM OTH PLACES ON SCHOOL GROUNDS? 434-434 V288 AVOID ANY EXTRA-CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES? 435-435 V289 DID YOU AVOID ANY CLASSES? 436-436 V290 STAY HOME FROM SCHOOL? 437-437 V291 AFRAID OF BEING ATTACKED AT SCHOOL? 438-438 V292 AFRAID OF ATTACK TO OR FROM SCHOOL? 439-439 V293 OTHERWISE AFRAID OF BEING ATTACKED? 440-440 V294 EVER BRING A GUN TO SCHOOL-LAST 6 MOS? 441-441 V295 EVER BRING A KNIFE TO SCHOOL-LAST 6 MOS? 442-442 V296 EVER BRING OTH WEAPON TO SCHOOL-LAST 6 MOS? 443-443 V297 OTH STUDNTS BROUGHT GUN TO SCHL-LAST 6 MOS? 444-444 V298 SEEN ANOTHER STUDENT WITH A GUN-LAST 6 MOS? 445-445 V299 COULD YOU GET LOADED GUN-LAST 6 MOS? 446-446 V300 ARE THERE ANY GANGS AT YOUR SCHOOL? 447-447 V301 GANGS INVLVD-VIOLENCE AT SCHOOL-LAST 6 MOS? 448-448 V302 GANGS INVLVD-DRUG SALES AT SCHL-LAST 6 MOS? 449-449 V303 IN LAST 4 WEEKS, SKIP ANY CLASSES? 450-450 Page 27 V304 LAST 4 WEEKS, HOW MANY DAYS SKIP CLASS? 451-452 V305 GRADES THIS YEAR ACROSS ALL SUBJECTS 453-453 V306 WILL ATTEND SCHOOL AFTER HIGH SCHOOL? 454-454 V307 WILL GRADUATE FROM A 4-YEAR COLLEGE? 455-455 V308 WAS AN ADULT PRESENT DURING QUESTIONS? 456-456 V309 SCS PERSON WEIGHT(INCOMING AND CONTINUING) 457-468 V310 1ST INCIDENT PER PERSON BEGINS CHAR 475 469-471 V311 INCIDENT RECORDS ARE 615 CHARACTERS LONG 472-474 Page 28VARIABLE DESCRIPTION LIST For Incident-Level Variables The School Crime Supplement, 2001 contains information on up to seven crime incidents. Each incident contains 523 variables which repeat seven times. In the codebook body, only the variable name of the first occurrence of an item (i.e., in the first incident) is listed. A complete list of variables that correspond to each other across incidents is listed below. If, for example, the user wishes to see the question text or review the coding of variable V1881 (4: LINE NUMBER OF RESPONDENT), the user should refer to the codebook for the first occurrence of this variable: V312 (1: LINE NUMBER OF RESPONDENT) in column location 475-476. The Census Bureau has listed two important variables, V831: Was it in your school? (source code 628) and V832: In what part of the building did it happen? (source code 629), at the end of the incident variables. These variables are new to the NCVS. They were added to the end of the incident variables in order to preserve the record layout of other variables. These two variables go with variable V341: How did the offender (get in/try to get in)? (source code627). Var Description Location V312 1: LINE NUMBER OF RESPONDENT 475-476 V835 2: LINE NUMBER OF RESPONDENT 1090-1091 V1358 3: LINE NUMBER OF RESPONDENT 1705-1706 V1881 4: LINE NUMBER OF RESPONDENT 2320-2321 V2404 5: LINE NUMBER OF RESPONDENT 2935-2936 V2927 6: LINE NUMBER OF RESPONDENT 3550-3551 V3450 7: LINE NUMBER OF RESPONDENT 4165-4166 V313 1: INCIDENT REPORTED-SCREEN QUESTION NO. 477-478 V836 2: INCIDENT REPORTED-SCREEN QUESTION NO. 1092-1093 V1359 3: INCIDENT REPORTED-SCREEN QUESTION NO. 1707-1708 V1882 4: INCIDENT REPORTED-SCREEN QUESTION NO. 2322-2323 V2405 5: INCIDENT REPORTED-SCREEN QUESTION NO. 2937-2938 V2928 6: INCIDENT REPORTED-SCREEN QUESTION NO. 3552-3553 V3451 7: INCIDENT REPORTED-SCREEN QUESTION NO. 4167-4168 V314 1: INCIDENT NUMBER 479-480 V837 2: INCIDENT NUMBER 1094-1095 V1360 3: INCIDENT NUMBER 1709-1710 V1883 4: INCIDENT NUMBER 2324-2325 V2406 5: INCIDENT NUMBER 2939-2940 V2929 6: INCIDENT NUMBER 3554-3555 V3452 7: INCIDENT NUMBER 4169-4170 V315 1: RESIDENCE DURING THIS INCIDENT 481-481 V838 2: RESIDENCE DURING THIS INCIDENT 1096-1096 V1361 3: RESIDENCE DURING THIS INCIDENT 1711-1711 V1884 4: RESIDENCE DURING THIS INCIDENT 2326-2326 V2407 5: RESIDENCE DURING THIS INCIDENT 2941-2941 V2930 6: RESIDENCE DURING THIS INCIDENT 3556-3556 V3453 7: RESIDENCE DURING THIS INCIDENT 4171-4171 V316 1: MONTH OF THIS INCIDENT 482-483 V839 2: MONTH OF THIS INCIDENT 1097-1098 V1362 3: MONTH OF THIS INCIDENT 1712-1713 V1885 4: MONTH OF THIS INCIDENT 2327-2328 V2408 5: MONTH OF THIS INCIDENT 2942-2943 V2931 6: MONTH OF THIS INCIDENT 3557-3558 V3454 7: MONTH OF THIS INCIDENT 4172-4173 Page 29  V317 1: YEAR OF THIS INCIDENT 484-485 V840 2: YEAR OF THIS INCIDENT 1099-1100 V1363 3: YEAR OF THIS INCIDENT 1714-1715 V1886 4: YEAR OF THIS INCIDENT 2329-2330 V2409 5: YEAR OF THIS INCIDENT 2944-2945 V2932 6: YEAR OF THIS INCIDENT 3559-3560 V3455 7: YEAR OF THIS INCIDENT 4174-4175 V318 1: NO. THIS TYPE OF INCIDENT LAST 6 MONTHS 486-488 V841 2: NO. THIS TYPE OF INCIDENT LAST 6 MONTHS 1101-1103 V1364 3: NO. THIS TYPE OF INCIDENT LAST 6 MONTHS 1716-1718 V1887 4: NO. THIS TYPE OF INCIDENT LAST 6 MONTHS 2331-2333 V2410 5: NO. THIS TYPE OF INCIDENT LAST 6 MONTHS 2946-2948 V2933 6: NO. THIS TYPE OF INCIDENT LAST 6 MONTHS 3561-3563 V3456 7: NO. THIS TYPE OF INCIDENT LAST 6 MONTHS 4176-4178 V319 1: HOW MANY INCIDENTS? 489-489 V842 2: HOW MANY INCIDENTS? 1104-1104 V1365 3: HOW MANY INCIDENTS? 1719-1719 V1888 4: HOW MANY INCIDENTS? 2334-2334 V2411 5: HOW MANY INCIDENTS? 2949-2949 V2934 6: HOW MANY INCIDENTS? 3564-3564 V3457 7: HOW MANY INCIDENTS? 4179-4179 V320 1: SIMILAR TO EACH OTHER OR DIFFERENT? 490-490 V843 2: SIMILAR TO EACH OTHER OR DIFFERENT? 1105-1105 V1366 3: SIMILAR TO EACH OTHER OR DIFFERENT? 1720-1720 V1889 4: SIMILAR TO EACH OTHER OR DIFFERENT? 2335-2335 V2412 5: SIMILAR TO EACH OTHER OR DIFFERENT? 2950-2950 V2935 6: SIMILAR TO EACH OTHER OR DIFFERENT? 3565-3565 V3458 7: SIMILAR TO EACH OTHER OR DIFFERENT? 4180-4180 V321 1: CAN YOU DISTINGUISH THEM FROM EACH OTHER? 491-491 V844 2: CAN YOU DISTINGUISH THEM FROM EACH OTHER? 1106-1106 V1367 3: CAN YOU DISTINGUISH THEM FROM EACH OTHER? 1721-1721 V1890 4: CAN YOU DISTINGUISH THEM FROM EACH OTHER? 2336-2336 V2413 5: CAN YOU DISTINGUISH THEM FROM EACH OTHER? 2951-2951 V2936 6: CAN YOU DISTINGUISH THEM FROM EACH OTHER? 3566-3566 V3459 7: CAN YOU DISTINGUISH THEM FROM EACH OTHER? 4181-4181 V322 1: TIME OF MOST RECENT INCIDENT? 492-493 V845 2: TIME OF MOST RECENT INCIDENT? 1107-1108 V1368 3: TIME OF MOST RECENT INCIDENT? 1722-1723 V1891 4: TIME OF MOST RECENT INCIDENT? 2337-2338 V2414 5: TIME OF MOST RECENT INCIDENT? 2952-2953 V2937 6: TIME OF MOST RECENT INCIDENT? 3567-3568 V3460 7: TIME OF MOST RECENT INCIDENT? 4182-4183 V323 1: CITY, TOWN, OR VILLAGE OF INCIDENT? 494-494 V846 2: CITY, TOWN, OR VILLAGE OF INCIDENT? 1109-1109 V1369 3: CITY, TOWN, OR VILLAGE OF INCIDENT? 1724-1724 V1892 4: CITY, TOWN, OR VILLAGE OF INCIDENT? 2339-2339 V2415 5: CITY, TOWN, OR VILLAGE OF INCIDENT? 2954-2954 V2938 6: CITY, TOWN, OR VILLAGE OF INCIDENT? 3569-3569 V3461 7: CITY, TOWN, OR VILLAGE OF INCIDENT? 4184-4184 V324 1: SAME COUNTY/STATE AS PRESENT RESIDENCE? 495-495 V847 2: SAME COUNTY/STATE AS PRESENT RESIDENCE? 1110-1110 V1370 3: SAME COUNTY/STATE AS PRESENT RESIDENCE? 1725-1725 V1893 4: SAME COUNTY/STATE AS PRESENT RESIDENCE? 2340-2340 V2416 5: SAME COUNTY/STATE AS PRESENT RESIDENCE? 2955-2955 Page 30 V2939 6: SAME COUNTY/STATE AS PRESENT RESIDENCE? 3570-3570 V3462 7: SAME COUNTY/STATE AS PRESENT RESIDENCE? 4185-4185 V325 1: LOCATION OF INCIDENT? 496-497 V848 2: LOCATION OF INCIDENT? 1111-1112 V1371 3: LOCATION OF INCIDENT? 1726-1727 V1894 4: LOCATION OF INCIDENT? 2341-2342 V2417 5: LOCATION OF INCIDENT? 2956-2957 V2940 6: LOCATION OF INCIDENT? 3571-3572 V3463 7: LOCATION OF INCIDENT? 4186-4187 V326 1: OFFENDER LIVE OR HAVE RIGHT TO BE THERE? 498-498 V849 2: OFFENDER LIVE OR HAVE RIGHT TO BE THERE? 1113-1113 V1372 3: OFFENDER LIVE OR HAVE RIGHT TO BE THERE? 1728-1728 V1895 4: OFFENDER LIVE OR HAVE RIGHT TO BE THERE? 2343-2343 V2418 5: OFFENDER LIVE OR HAVE RIGHT TO BE THERE? 2958-2958 V2941 6: OFFENDER LIVE OR HAVE RIGHT TO BE THERE? 3573-3573 V3464 7: OFFENDER LIVE OR HAVE RIGHT TO BE THERE? 4188-4188 V327 1: DID THE OFFENDER ACTUALLY GET INSIDE? 499-499 V850 2: DID THE OFFENDER ACTUALLY GET INSIDE? 1114-1114 V1373 3: DID THE OFFENDER ACTUALLY GET INSIDE? 1729-1729 V1896 4: DID THE OFFENDER ACTUALLY GET INSIDE? 2344-2344 V2419 5: DID THE OFFENDER ACTUALLY GET INSIDE? 2959-2959 V2942 6: DID THE OFFENDER ACTUALLY GET INSIDE? 3574-3574 V3465 7: DID THE OFFENDER ACTUALLY GET INSIDE? 4189-4189 V328 1: DID THE OFFENDER TRY TO GET IN? 500-500 V851 2: DID THE OFFENDER TRY TO GET IN? 1115-1115 V1374 3: DID THE OFFENDER TRY TO GET IN? 1730-1730 V1897 4: DID THE OFFENDER TRY TO GET IN? 2345-2345 V2420 5: DID THE OFFENDER TRY TO GET IN? 2960-2960 V2943 6: DID THE OFFENDER TRY TO GET IN? 3575-3575 V3466 7: DID THE OFFENDER TRY TO GET IN? 4190-4190 V329 1: EVIDENCE OF FORCIBLE ENTRY? 501-501 V852 2: EVIDENCE OF FORCIBLE ENTRY? 1116-1116 V1375 3: EVIDENCE OF FORCIBLE ENTRY? 1731-1731 V1898 4: EVIDENCE OF FORCIBLE ENTRY? 2346-2346 V2421 5: EVIDENCE OF FORCIBLE ENTRY? 2961-2961 V2944 6: EVIDENCE OF FORCIBLE ENTRY? 3576-3576 V3467 7: EVIDENCE OF FORCIBLE ENTRY? 4191-4191 V330 1: LI FORCIBLE ENTRY EVIDENCE 502-502 V853 2: LI FORCIBLE ENTRY EVIDENCE 1117-1117 V1376 3: LI FORCIBLE ENTRY EVIDENCE 1732-1732 V1899 4: LI FORCIBLE ENTRY EVIDENCE 2347-2347 V2422 5: LI FORCIBLE ENTRY EVIDENCE 2962-2962 V2945 6: LI FORCIBLE ENTRY EVIDENCE 3577-3577 V3468 7: LI FORCIBLE ENTRY EVIDENCE 4192-4192 V331 1: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW FRAME OR GLASS 503-503 V854 2: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW FRAME OR GLASS 1118-1118 V1377 3: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW FRAME OR GLASS 1733-1733 V1900 4: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW FRAME OR GLASS 2348-2348 V2423 5: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW FRAME OR GLASS 2963-2963 V2946 6: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW FRAME OR GLASS 3578-3578 V3469 7: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW FRAME OR GLASS 4193-4193 V332 1: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW SCREEN 504-504 V855 2: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW SCREEN 1119-1119 V1378 3: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW SCREEN 1734-1734 Page 31 V1901 4: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW SCREEN 2349-2349 V2424 5: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW SCREEN 2964-2964 V2947 6: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW SCREEN 3579-3579 V3470 7: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW SCREEN 4194-4194 V333 1: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW LOCK 505-505 V856 2: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW LOCK 1120-1120 V1379 3: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW LOCK 1735-1735 V1902 4: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW LOCK 2350-2350 V2425 5: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW LOCK 2965-2965 V2948 6: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW LOCK 3580-3580 V3471 7: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW LOCK 4195-4195 V334 1: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW-OTHER 506-506 V857 2: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW-OTHER 1121-1121 V1380 3: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW-OTHER 1736-1736 V1903 4: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW-OTHER 2351-2351 V2426 5: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW-OTHER 2966-2966 V2949 6: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW-OTHER 3581-3581 V3472 7: C DAMAGE TO WINDOW-OTHER 4196-4196 V335 1: C DAMAGE TO DOOR FRAME OR GLASS PANES 507-507 V858 2: C DAMAGE TO DOOR FRAME OR GLASS PANES 1122-1122 V1381 3: C DAMAGE TO DOOR FRAME OR GLASS PANES 1737-1737 V1904 4: C DAMAGE TO DOOR FRAME OR GLASS PANES 2352-2352 V2427 5: C DAMAGE TO DOOR FRAME OR GLASS PANES 2967-2967 V2950 6: C DAMAGE TO DOOR FRAME OR GLASS PANES 3582-3582 V3473 7: C DAMAGE TO DOOR FRAME OR GLASS PANES 4197-4197 V336 1: C DAMAGE TO DOOR SCREEN 508-508 V859 2: C DAMAGE TO DOOR SCREEN 1123-1123 V1382 3: C DAMAGE TO DOOR SCREEN 1738-1738 V1905 4: C DAMAGE TO DOOR SCREEN 2353-2353 V2428 5: C DAMAGE TO DOOR SCREEN 2968-2968 V2951 6: C DAMAGE TO DOOR SCREEN 3583-3583 V3474 7: C DAMAGE TO DOOR SCREEN 4198-4198 V337 1: C DAMAGE TO DOOR LOCK OR HANDLE 509-509 V860 2: C DAMAGE TO DOOR LOCK OR HANDLE 1124-1124 V1383 3: C DAMAGE TO DOOR LOCK OR HANDLE 1739-1739 V1906 4: C DAMAGE TO DOOR LOCK OR HANDLE 2354-2354 V2429 5: C DAMAGE TO DOOR LOCK OR HANDLE 2969-2969 V2952 6: C DAMAGE TO DOOR LOCK OR HANDLE 3584-3584 V3475 7: C DAMAGE TO DOOR LOCK OR HANDLE 4199-4199 V338 1: C DAMAGE TO DOOR-OTHER 510-510 V861 2: C DAMAGE TO DOOR-OTHER 1125-1125 V1384 3: C DAMAGE TO DOOR-OTHER 1740-1740 V1907 4: C DAMAGE TO DOOR-OTHER 2355-2355 V2430 5: C DAMAGE TO DOOR-OTHER 2970-2970 V2953 6: C DAMAGE TO DOOR-OTHER 3585-3585 V3476 7: C DAMAGE TO DOOR-OTHER 4200-4200 V339 1: C DAMAGE OTHER THAN WINDOW OR DOOR 511-511 V862 2: C DAMAGE OTHER THAN WINDOW OR DOOR 1126-1126 V1385 3: C DAMAGE OTHER THAN WINDOW OR DOOR 1741-1741 V1908 4: C DAMAGE OTHER THAN WINDOW OR DOOR 2356-2356 V2431 5: C DAMAGE OTHER THAN WINDOW OR DOOR 2971-2971 V2954 6: C DAMAGE OTHER THAN WINDOW OR DOOR 3586-3586 V3477 7: C DAMAGE OTHER THAN WINDOW OR DOOR 4201-4201 Page 32 V340 1: RESIDUE FORCIBLE ENTRY EVIDENCE 512-512 V863 2: RESIDUE FORCIBLE ENTRY EVIDENCE 1127-1127 V1386 3: RESIDUE FORCIBLE ENTRY EVIDENCE 1742-1742 V1909 4: RESIDUE FORCIBLE ENTRY EVIDENCE 2357-2357 V2432 5: RESIDUE FORCIBLE ENTRY EVIDENCE 2972-2972 V2955 6: RESIDUE FORCIBLE ENTRY EVIDENCE 3587-3587 V3478 7: RESIDUE FORCIBLE ENTRY EVIDENCE 4202-4202 V341 1: HOW DID OFFENDER (GET IN/TRY TO GET IN)? 513-514 V864 2: HOW DID OFFENDER (GET IN/TRY TO GET IN)? 1128-1129 V1387 3: HOW DID OFFENDER (GET IN/TRY TO GET IN)? 1743-1744 V1910 4: HOW DID OFFENDER (GET IN/TRY TO GET IN)? 2358-2359 V2433 5: HOW DID OFFENDER (GET IN/TRY TO GET IN)? 2973-2974 V2956 6: HOW DID OFFENDER (GET IN/TRY TO GET IN)? 3588-3589 V3479 7: HOW DID OFFENDER (GET IN/TRY TO GET IN)? 4203-4204 V342 1: RESTRICTED OR PUBLIC AREA? 515-515 V865 2: RESTRICTED OR PUBLIC AREA? 1130-1130 V1388 3: RESTRICTED OR PUBLIC AREA? 1745-1745 V1911 4: RESTRICTED OR PUBLIC AREA? 2360-2360 V2434 5: RESTRICTED OR PUBLIC AREA? 2975-2975 V2957 6: RESTRICTED OR PUBLIC AREA? 3590-3590 V3480 7: RESTRICTED OR PUBLIC AREA? 4205-4205 V343 1: HAPPENED OUTDOORS, INDOORS, OR BOTH? 516-516 V866 2: HAPPENED OUTDOORS, INDOORS, OR BOTH? 1131-1131 V1389 3: HAPPENED OUTDOORS, INDOORS, OR BOTH? 1746-1746 V1912 4: HAPPENED OUTDOORS, INDOORS, OR BOTH? 2361-2361 V2435 5: HAPPENED OUTDOORS, INDOORS, OR BOTH? 2976-2976 V2958 6: HAPPENED OUTDOORS, INDOORS, OR BOTH? 3591-3591 V3481 7: HAPPENED OUTDOORS, INDOORS, OR BOTH? 4206-4206 V344 1: HOW FAR AWAY FROM HOME DID THIS HAPPEN? 517-517 V867 2: HOW FAR AWAY FROM HOME DID THIS HAPPEN? 1132-1132 V1390 3: HOW FAR AWAY FROM HOME DID THIS HAPPEN? 1747-1747 V1913 4: HOW FAR AWAY FROM HOME DID THIS HAPPEN? 2362-2362 V2436 5: HOW FAR AWAY FROM HOME DID THIS HAPPEN? 2977-2977 V2959 6: HOW FAR AWAY FROM HOME DID THIS HAPPEN? 3592-3592 V3482 7: HOW FAR AWAY FROM HOME DID THIS HAPPEN? 4207-4207 V345 1: YOU OR OTHER HH MEMB PRESENT?(ORIGINAL) 518-518 V868 2: YOU OR OTHER HH MEMB PRESENT?(ORIGINAL) 1133-1133 V1391 3: YOU OR OTHER HH MEMB PRESENT?(ORIGINAL) 1748-1748 V1914 4: YOU OR OTHER HH MEMB PRESENT?(ORIGINAL) 2363-2363 V2437 5: YOU OR OTHER HH MEMB PRESENT?(ORIGINAL) 2978-2978 V2960 6: YOU OR OTHER HH MEMB PRESENT?(ORIGINAL) 3593-3593 V3483 7: YOU OR OTHER HH MEMB PRESENT?(ORIGINAL) 4208-4208 V346 1: YOU OR OTHER HH MEMB PRESENT?(ALLOCATED) 519-519 V869 2: YOU OR OTHER HH MEMB PRESENT?(ALLOCATED) 1134-1134 V1392 3: YOU OR OTHER HH MEMB PRESENT?(ALLOCATED) 1749-1749 V1915 4: YOU OR OTHER HH MEMB PRESENT?(ALLOCATED) 2364-2364 V2438 5: YOU OR OTHER HH MEMB PRESENT?(ALLOCATED) 2979-2979 V2961 6: YOU OR OTHER HH MEMB PRESENT?(ALLOCATED) 3594-3594 V3484 7: YOU OR OTHER HH MEMB PRESENT?(ALLOCATED) 4209-4209 V347 1: WHICH HH MEMBERS WERE PRESENT?(ORIGINAL) 520-520 V870 2: WHICH HH MEMBERS WERE PRESENT?(ORIGINAL) 1135-1135 V1393 3: WHICH HH MEMBERS WERE PRESENT?(ORIGINAL) 1750-1750 V1916 4: WHICH HH MEMBERS WERE PRESENT?(ORIGINAL) 2365-2365 V2439 5: WHICH HH MEMBERS WERE PRESENT?(ORIGINAL) 2980-2980 V2962 6: WHICH HH MEMBERS WERE PRESENT?(ORIGINAL) 3595-3595 Page 33 V3485 7: WHICH HH MEMBERS WERE PRESENT?(ORIGINAL) 4210-4210 V348 1: WHICH HH MEMBERS WERE PRESENT?(ALLOCATED) 521-521 V871 2: WHICH HH MEMBERS WERE PRESENT?(ALLOCATED) 1136-1136 V1394 3: WHICH HH MEMBERS WERE PRESENT?(ALLOCATED) 1751-1751 V1917 4: WHICH HH MEMBERS WERE PRESENT?(ALLOCATED) 2366-2366 V2440 5: WHICH HH MEMBERS WERE PRESENT?(ALLOCATED) 2981-2981 V2963 6: WHICH HH MEMBERS WERE PRESENT?(ALLOCATED) 3596-3596 V3486 7: WHICH HH MEMBERS WERE PRESENT?(ALLOCATED) 4211-4211 V349 1: DID YOU PERSONALLY SEE AN OFFENDER? 522-522 V872 2: DID YOU PERSONALLY SEE AN OFFENDER? 1137-1137 V1395 3: DID YOU PERSONALLY SEE AN OFFENDER? 1752-1752 V1918 4: DID YOU PERSONALLY SEE AN OFFENDER? 2367-2367 V2441 5: DID YOU PERSONALLY SEE AN OFFENDER? 2982-2982 V2964 6: DID YOU PERSONALLY SEE AN OFFENDER? 3597-3597 V3487 7: DID YOU PERSONALLY SEE AN OFFENDER? 4212-4212 V350 1: DID THE OFFENDER HAVE A WEAPON? 523-523 V873 2: DID THE OFFENDER HAVE A WEAPON? 1138-1138 V1396 3: DID THE OFFENDER HAVE A WEAPON? 1753-1753 V1919 4: DID THE OFFENDER HAVE A WEAPON? 2368-2368 V2442 5: DID THE OFFENDER HAVE A WEAPON? 2983-2983 V2965 6: DID THE OFFENDER HAVE A WEAPON? 3598-3598 V3488 7: DID THE OFFENDER HAVE A WEAPON? 4213-4213 V351 1: LI WEAPON 524-524 V874 2: LI WEAPON 1139-1139 V1397 3: LI WEAPON 1754-1754 V1920 4: LI WEAPON 2369-2369 V2443 5: LI WEAPON 2984-2984 V2966 6: LI WEAPON 3599-3599 V3489 7: LI WEAPON 4214-4214 V352 1: C HAND GUN (PISTOL, REVOLVER, ETC.) 525-525 V875 2: C HAND GUN (PISTOL, REVOLVER, ETC.) 1140-1140 V1398 3: C HAND GUN (PISTOL, REVOLVER, ETC.) 1755-1755 V1921 4: C HAND GUN (PISTOL, REVOLVER, ETC.) 2370-2370 V2444 5: C HAND GUN (PISTOL, REVOLVER, ETC.) 2985-2985 V2967 6: C HAND GUN (PISTOL, REVOLVER, ETC.) 3600-3600 V3490 7: C HAND GUN (PISTOL, REVOLVER, ETC.) 4215-4215 V353 1: C OTHER GUN (RIFLE, SHOTGUN, ETC.) 526-526 V876 2: C OTHER GUN (RIFLE, SHOTGUN, ETC.) 1141-1141 V1399 3: C OTHER GUN (RIFLE, SHOTGUN, ETC.) 1756-1756 V1922 4: C OTHER GUN (RIFLE, SHOTGUN, ETC.) 2371-2371 V2445 5: C OTHER GUN (RIFLE, SHOTGUN, ETC.) 2986-2986 V2968 6: C OTHER GUN (RIFLE, SHOTGUN, ETC.) 3601-3601 V3491 7: C OTHER GUN (RIFLE, SHOTGUN, ETC.) 4216-4216 V354 1: C KNIFE 527-527 V877 2: C KNIFE 1142-1142 V1400 3: C KNIFE 1757-1757 V1923 4: C KNIFE 2372-2372 V2446 5: C KNIFE 2987-2987 V2969 6: C KNIFE 3602-3602 V3492 7: C KNIFE 4217-4217 V355 1: C OTHER SHARP OBJECT (SCISSORS, ETC.) 528-528 V878 2: C OTHER SHARP OBJECT (SCISSORS, ETC.) 1143-1143 V1401 3: C OTHER SHARP OBJECT (SCISSORS, ETC.) 1758-1758 V1924 4: C OTHER SHARP OBJECT (SCISSORS, ETC.) 2373-2373 Page 34 V2447 5: C OTHER SHARP OBJECT (SCISSORS, ETC.) 2988-2988 V2970 6: C OTHER SHARP OBJECT (SCISSORS, ETC.) 3603-3603 V3493 7: C OTHER SHARP OBJECT (SCISSORS, ETC.) 4218-4218 V356 1: C BLUNT OBJECT (ROCK, CLUB, ETC.) 529-529 V879 2: C BLUNT OBJECT (ROCK, CLUB, ETC.) 1144-1144 V1402 3: C BLUNT OBJECT (ROCK, CLUB, ETC.) 1759-1759 V1925 4: C BLUNT OBJECT (ROCK, CLUB, ETC.) 2374-2374 V2448 5: C BLUNT OBJECT (ROCK, CLUB, ETC.) 2989-2989 V2971 6: C BLUNT OBJECT (ROCK, CLUB, ETC.) 3604-3604 V3494 7: C BLUNT OBJECT (ROCK, CLUB, ETC.) 4219-4219 V357 1: C OTHER 530-530 V880 2: C OTHER 1145-1145 V1403 3: C OTHER 1760-1760 V1926 4: C OTHER 2375-2375 V2449 5: C OTHER 2990-2990 V2972 6: C OTHER 3605-3605 V3495 7: C OTHER 4220-4220 V358 1: C GUN TYPE - UNKNOWN 531-531 V881 2: C GUN TYPE - UNKNOWN 1146-1146 V1404 3: C GUN TYPE - UNKNOWN 1761-1761 V1927 4: C GUN TYPE - UNKNOWN 2376-2376 V2450 5: C GUN TYPE - UNKNOWN 2991-2991 V2973 6: C GUN TYPE - UNKNOWN 3606-3606 V3496 7: C GUN TYPE - UNKNOWN 4221-4221 V359 1: RESIDUE WEAPON 532-532 V882 2: RESIDUE WEAPON 1147-1147 V1405 3: RESIDUE WEAPON 1762-1762 V1928 4: RESIDUE WEAPON 2377-2377 V2451 5: RESIDUE WEAPON 2992-2992 V2974 6: RESIDUE WEAPON 3607-3607 V3497 7: RESIDUE WEAPON 4222-4222 V360 1: OFFEND. ATTACK YOU IN ANY WAY?(ORIGINAL) 533-533 V883 2: OFFEND. ATTACK YOU IN ANY WAY?(ORIGINAL) 1148-1148 V1406 3: OFFEND. ATTACK YOU IN ANY WAY?(ORIGINAL) 1763-1763 V1929 4: OFFEND. ATTACK YOU IN ANY WAY?(ORIGINAL) 2378-2378 V2452 5: OFFEND. ATTACK YOU IN ANY WAY?(ORIGINAL) 2993-2993 V2975 6: OFFEND. ATTACK YOU IN ANY WAY?(ORIGINAL) 3608-3608 V3498 7: OFFEND. ATTACK YOU IN ANY WAY?(ORIGINAL) 4223-4223 V361 1: OFFEND. ATTACK YOU IN ANY WAY?(ALLOCATED) 534-534 V884 2: OFFEND. ATTACK YOU IN ANY WAY?(ALLOCATED) 1149-1149 V1407 3: OFFEND. ATTACK YOU IN ANY WAY?(ALLOCATED) 1764-1764 V1930 4: OFFEND. ATTACK YOU IN ANY WAY?(ALLOCATED) 2379-2379 V2453 5: OFFEND. ATTACK YOU IN ANY WAY?(ALLOCATED) 2994-2994 V2976 6: OFFEND. ATTACK YOU IN ANY WAY?(ALLOCATED) 3609-3609 V3499 7: OFFEND. ATTACK YOU IN ANY WAY?(ALLOCATED) 4224-4224 V362 1: OFFENDER TRY TO ATTACK YOU? (ORIGINAL) 535-535 V885 2: OFFENDER TRY TO ATTACK YOU? (ORIGINAL) 1150-1150 V1408 3: OFFENDER TRY TO ATTACK YOU? (ORIGINAL) 1765-1765 V1931 4: OFFENDER TRY TO ATTACK YOU? (ORIGINAL) 2380-2380 V2454 5: OFFENDER TRY TO ATTACK YOU? (ORIGINAL) 2995-2995 V2977 6: OFFENDER TRY TO ATTACK YOU? (ORIGINAL) 3610-3610 V3500 7: OFFENDER TRY TO ATTACK YOU? (ORIGINAL) 4225-4225 V363 1: OFFENDER TRY TO ATTACK YOU? (ALLOCATED) 536-536 V886 2: OFFENDER TRY TO ATTACK YOU? (ALLOCATED) 1151-1151 Page 35 V1409 3: OFFENDER TRY TO ATTACK YOU? (ALLOCATED) 1766-1766 V1932 4: OFFENDER TRY TO ATTACK YOU? (ALLOCATED) 2381-2381 V2455 5: OFFENDER TRY TO ATTACK YOU? (ALLOCATED) 2996-2996 V2978 6: OFFENDER TRY TO ATTACK YOU? (ALLOCATED) 3611-3611 V3501 7: OFFENDER TRY TO ATTACK YOU? (ALLOCATED) 4226-4226 V364 1: OFFENDER THREATEN YOU HARM? (ORIGINAL) 537-537 V887 2: OFFENDER THREATEN YOU HARM? (ORIGINAL) 1152-1152 V1410 3: OFFENDER THREATEN YOU HARM? (ORIGINAL) 1767-1767 V1933 4: OFFENDER THREATEN YOU HARM? (ORIGINAL) 2382-2382 V2456 5: OFFENDER THREATEN YOU HARM? (ORIGINAL) 2997-2997 V2979 6: OFFENDER THREATEN YOU HARM? (ORIGINAL) 3612-3612 V3502 7: OFFENDER THREATEN YOU HARM? (ORIGINAL) 4227-4227 V365 1: OFFENDER THREATEN YOU HARM? (ALLOCATED) 538-538 V888 2: OFFENDER THREATEN YOU HARM? (ALLOCATED) 1153-1153 V1411 3: OFFENDER THREATEN YOU HARM? (ALLOCATED) 1768-1768 V1934 4: OFFENDER THREATEN YOU HARM? (ALLOCATED) 2383-2383 V2457 5: OFFENDER THREATEN YOU HARM? (ALLOCATED) 2998-2998 V2980 6: OFFENDER THREATEN YOU HARM? (ALLOCATED) 3613-3613 V3503 7: OFFENDER THREATEN YOU HARM? (ALLOCATED) 4228-4228 V366 1: LI WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 539-539 V889 2: LI WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 1154-1154 V1412 3: LI WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 1769-1769 V1935 4: LI WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 2384-2384 V2458 5: LI WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 2999-2999 V2981 6: LI WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 3614-3614 V3504 7: LI WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 4229-4229 V367 1: C SOMETHING TAKEN WITHOUT PERMISSION 540-540 V890 2: C SOMETHING TAKEN WITHOUT PERMISSION 1155-1155 V1413 3: C SOMETHING TAKEN WITHOUT PERMISSION 1770-1770 V1936 4: C SOMETHING TAKEN WITHOUT PERMISSION 2385-2385 V2459 5: C SOMETHING TAKEN WITHOUT PERMISSION 3000-3000 V2982 6: C SOMETHING TAKEN WITHOUT PERMISSION 3615-3615 V3505 7: C SOMETHING TAKEN WITHOUT PERMISSION 4230-4230 V368 1: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO TAKE SOMETHING 541-541 V891 2: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO TAKE SOMETHING 1156-1156 V1414 3: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO TAKE SOMETHING 1771-1771 V1937 4: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO TAKE SOMETHING 2386-2386 V2460 5: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO TAKE SOMETHING 3001-3001 V2983 6: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO TAKE SOMETHING 3616-3616 V3506 7: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO TAKE SOMETHING 4231-4231 V369 1: C HARASSED, ARGUMENT, ABUSIVE LANGUAGE 542-542 V892 2: C HARASSED, ARGUMENT, ABUSIVE LANGUAGE 1157-1157 V1415 3: C HARASSED, ARGUMENT, ABUSIVE LANGUAGE 1772-1772 V1938 4: C HARASSED, ARGUMENT, ABUSIVE LANGUAGE 2387-2387 V2461 5: C HARASSED, ARGUMENT, ABUSIVE LANGUAGE 3002-3002 V2984 6: C HARASSED, ARGUMENT, ABUSIVE LANGUAGE 3617-3617 V3507 7: C HARASSED, ARGUMENT, ABUSIVE LANGUAGE 4232-4232 V370 1: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITH FORCE 543-543 V893 2: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITH FORCE 1158-1158 V1416 3: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITH FORCE 1773-1773 V1939 4: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITH FORCE 2388-2388 V2462 5: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITH FORCE 3003-3003 V2985 6: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITH FORCE 3618-3618 V3508 7: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITH FORCE 4233-4233 Page 36 V371 1: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITHOUT FORCE 544-544 V894 2: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITHOUT FORCE 1159-1159 V1417 3: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITHOUT FORCE 1774-1774 V1940 4: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITHOUT FORCE 2389-2389 V2463 5: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITHOUT FORCE 3004-3004 V2986 6: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITHOUT FORCE 3619-3619 V3509 7: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITHOUT FORCE 4234-4234 V372 1: C FORCIBLE ENTRY (OR ATTEMPT) HOUSE/APT. 545-545 V895 2: C FORCIBLE ENTRY (OR ATTEMPT) HOUSE/APT. 1160-1160 V1418 3: C FORCIBLE ENTRY (OR ATTEMPT) HOUSE/APT. 1775-1775 V1941 4: C FORCIBLE ENTRY (OR ATTEMPT) HOUSE/APT. 2390-2390 V2464 5: C FORCIBLE ENTRY (OR ATTEMPT) HOUSE/APT. 3005-3005 V2987 6: C FORCIBLE ENTRY (OR ATTEMPT) HOUSE/APT. 3620-3620 V3510 7: C FORCIBLE ENTRY (OR ATTEMPT) HOUSE/APT. 4235-4235 V373 1: C FORCIBLE ENTRY (OR ATTEMPT) CAR 546-546 V896 2: C FORCIBLE ENTRY (OR ATTEMPT) CAR 1161-1161 V1419 3: C FORCIBLE ENTRY (OR ATTEMPT) CAR 1776-1776 V1942 4: C FORCIBLE ENTRY (OR ATTEMPT) CAR 2391-2391 V2465 5: C FORCIBLE ENTRY (OR ATTEMPT) CAR 3006-3006 V2988 6: C FORCIBLE ENTRY (OR ATTEMPT) CAR 3621-3621 V3511 7: C FORCIBLE ENTRY (OR ATTEMPT) CAR 4236-4236 V374 1: C DAMAGED OR DESTROYED PROPERTY 547-547 V897 2: C DAMAGED OR DESTROYED PROPERTY 1162-1162 V1420 3: C DAMAGED OR DESTROYED PROPERTY 1777-1777 V1943 4: C DAMAGED OR DESTROYED PROPERTY 2392-2392 V2466 5: C DAMAGED OR DESTROYED PROPERTY 3007-3007 V2989 6: C DAMAGED OR DESTROYED PROPERTY 3622-3622 V3512 7: C DAMAGED OR DESTROYED PROPERTY 4237-4237 V375 1: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO DAMAGE PROPERTY 548-548 V898 2: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO DAMAGE PROPERTY 1163-1163 V1421 3: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO DAMAGE PROPERTY 1778-1778 V1944 4: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO DAMAGE PROPERTY 2393-2393 V2467 5: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO DAMAGE PROPERTY 3008-3008 V2990 6: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO DAMAGE PROPERTY 3623-3623 V3513 7: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO DAMAGE PROPERTY 4238-4238 V376 1: C OTHER 549-549 V899 2: C OTHER 1164-1164 V1422 3: C OTHER 1779-1779 V1945 4: C OTHER 2394-2394 V2468 5: C OTHER 3009-3009 V2991 6: C OTHER 3624-3624 V3514 7: C OTHER 4239-4239 V377 1: RESIDUE WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 550-550 V900 2: RESIDUE WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 1165-1165 V1423 3: RESIDUE WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 1780-1780 V1946 4: RESIDUE WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 2395-2395 V2469 5: RESIDUE WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 3010-3010 V2992 6: RESIDUE WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 3625-3625 V3515 7: RESIDUE WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 4240-4240 V378 1: LI ATTEMPT OR THREAT OF ATTACK 551-551 V901 2: LI ATTEMPT OR THREAT OF ATTACK 1166-1166 V1424 3: LI ATTEMPT OR THREAT OF ATTACK 1781-1781 V1947 4: LI ATTEMPT OR THREAT OF ATTACK 2396-2396 V2470 5: LI ATTEMPT OR THREAT OF ATTACK 3011-3011 Page 37 V2993 6: LI ATTEMPT OR THREAT OF ATTACK 3626-3626 V3516 7: LI ATTEMPT OR THREAT OF ATTACK 4241-4241 V379 1: C VERBAL THREAT OF RAPE 552-552 V902 2: C VERBAL THREAT OF RAPE 1167-1167 V1425 3: C VERBAL THREAT OF RAPE 1782-1782 V1948 4: C VERBAL THREAT OF RAPE 2397-2397 V2471 5: C VERBAL THREAT OF RAPE 3012-3012 V2994 6: C VERBAL THREAT OF RAPE 3627-3627 V3517 7: C VERBAL THREAT OF RAPE 4242-4242 V380 1: C VERBAL THREAT TO KILL 553-553 V903 2: C VERBAL THREAT TO KILL 1168-1168 V1426 3: C VERBAL THREAT TO KILL 1783-1783 V1949 4: C VERBAL THREAT TO KILL 2398-2398 V2472 5: C VERBAL THREAT TO KILL 3013-3013 V2995 6: C VERBAL THREAT TO KILL 3628-3628 V3518 7: C VERBAL THREAT TO KILL 4243-4243 V381 1: C VERBAL THREAT OF ATTACK 554-554 V904 2: C VERBAL THREAT OF ATTACK 1169-1169 V1427 3: C VERBAL THREAT OF ATTACK 1784-1784 V1950 4: C VERBAL THREAT OF ATTACK 2399-2399 V2473 5: C VERBAL THREAT OF ATTACK 3014-3014 V2996 6: C VERBAL THREAT OF ATTACK 3629-3629 V3519 7: C VERBAL THREAT OF ATTACK 4244-4244 V382 1: C VERBAL THREAT SEXUAL ASSAULT (NOT RAPE) 555-555 V905 2: C VERBAL THREAT SEXUAL ASSAULT (NOT RAPE) 1170-1170 V1428 3: C VERBAL THREAT SEXUAL ASSAULT (NOT RAPE) 1785-1785 V1951 4: C VERBAL THREAT SEXUAL ASSAULT (NOT RAPE) 2400-2400 V2474 5: C VERBAL THREAT SEXUAL ASSAULT (NOT RAPE) 3015-3015 V2997 6: C VERBAL THREAT SEXUAL ASSAULT (NOT RAPE) 3630-3630 V3520 7: C VERBAL THREAT SEXUAL ASSAULT (NOT RAPE) 4245-4245 V383 1: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITH FORCE 556-556 V906 2: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITH FORCE 1171-1171 V1429 3: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITH FORCE 1786-1786 V1952 4: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITH FORCE 2401-2401 V2475 5: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITH FORCE 3016-3016 V2998 6: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITH FORCE 3631-3631 V3521 7: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITH FORCE 4246-4246 V384 1: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITHOUT FORCE 557-557 V907 2: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITHOUT FORCE 1172-1172 V1430 3: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITHOUT FORCE 1787-1787 V1953 4: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITHOUT FORCE 2402-2402 V2476 5: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITHOUT FORCE 3017-3017 V2999 6: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITHOUT FORCE 3632-3632 V3522 7: C UNWANTED SEXUAL CONTACT WITHOUT FORCE 4247-4247 V385 1: C WEAPON PRESENT OR THREAT WITH WEAPON 558-558 V908 2: C WEAPON PRESENT OR THREAT WITH WEAPON 1173-1173 V1431 3: C WEAPON PRESENT OR THREAT WITH WEAPON 1788-1788 V1954 4: C WEAPON PRESENT OR THREAT WITH WEAPON 2403-2403 V2477 5: C WEAPON PRESENT OR THREAT WITH WEAPON 3018-3018 V3000 6: C WEAPON PRESENT OR THREAT WITH WEAPON 3633-3633 V3523 7: C WEAPON PRESENT OR THREAT WITH WEAPON 4248-4248 V386 1: C SHOT AT (BUT MISSED) 559-559 V909 2: C SHOT AT (BUT MISSED) 1174-1174 V1432 3: C SHOT AT (BUT MISSED) 1789-1789 Page 38 V1955 4: C SHOT AT (BUT MISSED) 2404-2404 V2478 5: C SHOT AT (BUT MISSED) 3019-3019 V3001 6: C SHOT AT (BUT MISSED) 3634-3634 V3524 7: C SHOT AT (BUT MISSED) 4249-4249 V387 1: C ATTEMPTED ATTACK W/ KNIFE/SHARP WEAPON 560-560 V910 2: C ATTEMPTED ATTACK W/ KNIFE/SHARP WEAPON 1175-1175 V1433 3: C ATTEMPTED ATTACK W/ KNIFE/SHARP WEAPON 1790-1790 V1956 4: C ATTEMPTED ATTACK W/ KNIFE/SHARP WEAPON 2405-2405 V2479 5: C ATTEMPTED ATTACK W/ KNIFE/SHARP WEAPON 3020-3020 V3002 6: C ATTEMPTED ATTACK W/ KNIFE/SHARP WEAPON 3635-3635 V3525 7: C ATTEMPTED ATTACK W/ KNIFE/SHARP WEAPON 4250-4250 V388 1: C OTHER WEAPON (NOT GUN/KNIFE/SHARP W.) 561-561 V911 2: C OTHER WEAPON (NOT GUN/KNIFE/SHARP W.) 1176-1176 V1434 3: C OTHER WEAPON (NOT GUN/KNIFE/SHARP W.) 1791-1791 V1957 4: C OTHER WEAPON (NOT GUN/KNIFE/SHARP W.) 2406-2406 V2480 5: C OTHER WEAPON (NOT GUN/KNIFE/SHARP W.) 3021-3021 V3003 6: C OTHER WEAPON (NOT GUN/KNIFE/SHARP W.) 3636-3636 V3526 7: C OTHER WEAPON (NOT GUN/KNIFE/SHARP W.) 4251-4251 V389 1: C OBJECT THROWN AT PERSON 562-562 V912 2: C OBJECT THROWN AT PERSON 1177-1177 V1435 3: C OBJECT THROWN AT PERSON 1792-1792 V1958 4: C OBJECT THROWN AT PERSON 2407-2407 V2481 5: C OBJECT THROWN AT PERSON 3022-3022 V3004 6: C OBJECT THROWN AT PERSON 3637-3637 V3527 7: C OBJECT THROWN AT PERSON 4252-4252 V390 1: C FOLLOWED OR SURROUNDED 563-563 V913 2: C FOLLOWED OR SURROUNDED 1178-1178 V1436 3: C FOLLOWED OR SURROUNDED 1793-1793 V1959 4: C FOLLOWED OR SURROUNDED 2408-2408 V2482 5: C FOLLOWED OR SURROUNDED 3023-3023 V3005 6: C FOLLOWED OR SURROUNDED 3638-3638 V3528 7: C FOLLOWED OR SURROUNDED 4253-4253 V391 1: C TRIED TO HIT, KNOCK DOWN, HOLD, ETC. 564-564 V914 2: C TRIED TO HIT, KNOCK DOWN, HOLD, ETC. 1179-1179 V1437 3: C TRIED TO HIT, KNOCK DOWN, HOLD, ETC. 1794-1794 V1960 4: C TRIED TO HIT, KNOCK DOWN, HOLD, ETC. 2409-2409 V2483 5: C TRIED TO HIT, KNOCK DOWN, HOLD, ETC. 3024-3024 V3006 6: C TRIED TO HIT, KNOCK DOWN, HOLD, ETC. 3639-3639 V3529 7: C TRIED TO HIT, KNOCK DOWN, HOLD, ETC. 4254-4254 V392 1: C OTHER 565-565 V915 2: C OTHER 1180-1180 V1438 3: C OTHER 1795-1795 V1961 4: C OTHER 2410-2410 V2484 5: C OTHER 3025-3025 V3007 6: C OTHER 3640-3640 V3530 7: C OTHER 4255-4255 V393 1: RESIDUE ATTEMPT OR THREAT OF ATTACK 566-566 V916 2: RESIDUE ATTEMPT OR THREAT OF ATTACK 1181-1181 V1439 3: RESIDUE ATTEMPT OR THREAT OF ATTACK 1796-1796 V1962 4: RESIDUE ATTEMPT OR THREAT OF ATTACK 2411-2411 V2485 5: RESIDUE ATTEMPT OR THREAT OF ATTACK 3026-3026 V3008 6: RESIDUE ATTEMPT OR THREAT OF ATTACK 3641-3641 V3531 7: RESIDUE ATTEMPT OR THREAT OF ATTACK 4256-4256 Page 39 V394 1: LI HOW WERE YOU ATTACKED? 567-567 V917 2: LI HOW WERE YOU ATTACKED? 1182-1182 V1440 3: LI HOW WERE YOU ATTACKED? 1797-1797 V1963 4: LI HOW WERE YOU ATTACKED? 2412-2412 V2486 5: LI HOW WERE YOU ATTACKED? 3027-3027 V3009 6: LI HOW WERE YOU ATTACKED? 3642-3642 V3532 7: LI HOW WERE YOU ATTACKED? 4257-4257 V395 1: C RAPED 568-568 V918 2: C RAPED 1183-1183 V1441 3: C RAPED 1798-1798 V1964 4: C RAPED 2413-2413 V2487 5: C RAPED 3028-3028 V3010 6: C RAPED 3643-3643 V3533 7: C RAPED 4258-4258 V396 1: C TRIED TO RAPE 569-569 V919 2: C TRIED TO RAPE 1184-1184 V1442 3: C TRIED TO RAPE 1799-1799 V1965 4: C TRIED TO RAPE 2414-2414 V2488 5: C TRIED TO RAPE 3029-3029 V3011 6: C TRIED TO RAPE 3644-3644 V3534 7: C TRIED TO RAPE 4259-4259 V397 1: C SEXUAL ASSAULT (NOT RAPE OR ATTEMPT) 570-570 V920 2: C SEXUAL ASSAULT (NOT RAPE OR ATTEMPT) 1185-1185 V1443 3: C SEXUAL ASSAULT (NOT RAPE OR ATTEMPT) 1800-1800 V1966 4: C SEXUAL ASSAULT (NOT RAPE OR ATTEMPT) 2415-2415 V2489 5: C SEXUAL ASSAULT (NOT RAPE OR ATTEMPT) 3030-3030 V3012 6: C SEXUAL ASSAULT (NOT RAPE OR ATTEMPT) 3645-3645 V3535 7: C SEXUAL ASSAULT (NOT RAPE OR ATTEMPT) 4260-4260 V398 1: C SHOT 571-571 V921 2: C SHOT 1186-1186 V1444 3: C SHOT 1801-1801 V1967 4: C SHOT 2416-2416 V2490 5: C SHOT 3031-3031 V3013 6: C SHOT 3646-3646 V3536 7: C SHOT 4261-4261 V399 1: C SHOT AT (BUT MISSED) 572-572 V922 2: C SHOT AT (BUT MISSED) 1187-1187 V1445 3: C SHOT AT (BUT MISSED) 1802-1802 V1968 4: C SHOT AT (BUT MISSED) 2417-2417 V2491 5: C SHOT AT (BUT MISSED) 3032-3032 V3014 6: C SHOT AT (BUT MISSED) 3647-3647 V3537 7: C SHOT AT (BUT MISSED) 4262-4262 V400 1: C HIT WITH GUN HELD IN HAND 573-573 V923 2: C HIT WITH GUN HELD IN HAND 1188-1188 V1446 3: C HIT WITH GUN HELD IN HAND 1803-1803 V1969 4: C HIT WITH GUN HELD IN HAND 2418-2418 V2492 5: C HIT WITH GUN HELD IN HAND 3033-3033 V3015 6: C HIT WITH GUN HELD IN HAND 3648-3648 V3538 7: C HIT WITH GUN HELD IN HAND 4263-4263 V401 1: C STABBED/CUT WITH KNIFE/SHARP WEAPON 574-574 V924 2: C STABBED/CUT WITH KNIFE/SHARP WEAPON 1189-1189 V1447 3: C STABBED/CUT WITH KNIFE/SHARP WEAPON 1804-1804 V1970 4: C STABBED/CUT WITH KNIFE/SHARP WEAPON 2419-2419 V2493 5: C STABBED/CUT WITH KNIFE/SHARP WEAPON 3034-3034 Page 40 V3016 6: C STABBED/CUT WITH KNIFE/SHARP WEAPON 3649-3649 V3539 7: C STABBED/CUT WITH KNIFE/SHARP WEAPON 4264-4264 V402 1: C ATTEMPTED ATTACK W/ KNIFE/SHARP WEAPON 575-575 V925 2: C ATTEMPTED ATTACK W/ KNIFE/SHARP WEAPON 1190-1190 V1448 3: C ATTEMPTED ATTACK W/ KNIFE/SHARP WEAPON 1805-1805 V1971 4: C ATTEMPTED ATTACK W/ KNIFE/SHARP WEAPON 2420-2420 V2494 5: C ATTEMPTED ATTACK W/ KNIFE/SHARP WEAPON 3035-3035 V3017 6: C ATTEMPTED ATTACK W/ KNIFE/SHARP WEAPON 3650-3650 V3540 7: C ATTEMPTED ATTACK W/ KNIFE/SHARP WEAPON 4265-4265 V403 1: C HIT BY HANDHELD OBJECT (NOT GUN) 576-576 V926 2: C HIT BY HANDHELD OBJECT (NOT GUN) 1191-1191 V1449 3: C HIT BY HANDHELD OBJECT (NOT GUN) 1806-1806 V1972 4: C HIT BY HANDHELD OBJECT (NOT GUN) 2421-2421 V2495 5: C HIT BY HANDHELD OBJECT (NOT GUN) 3036-3036 V3018 6: C HIT BY HANDHELD OBJECT (NOT GUN) 3651-3651 V3541 7: C HIT BY HANDHELD OBJECT (NOT GUN) 4266-4266 V404 1: C HIT BY THROWN OBJECT 577-577 V927 2: C HIT BY THROWN OBJECT 1192-1192 V1450 3: C HIT BY THROWN OBJECT 1807-1807 V1973 4: C HIT BY THROWN OBJECT 2422-2422 V2496 5: C HIT BY THROWN OBJECT 3037-3037 V3019 6: C HIT BY THROWN OBJECT 3652-3652 V3542 7: C HIT BY THROWN OBJECT 4267-4267 V405 1: C ATTEMPT ATTACK W/ WEAPON(NOT GUN/KNIFE) 578-578 V928 2: C ATTEMPT ATTACK W/ WEAPON(NOT GUN/KNIFE) 1193-1193 V1451 3: C ATTEMPT ATTACK W/ WEAPON(NOT GUN/KNIFE) 1808-1808 V1974 4: C ATTEMPT ATTACK W/ WEAPON(NOT GUN/KNIFE) 2423-2423 V2497 5: C ATTEMPT ATTACK W/ WEAPON(NOT GUN/KNIFE) 3038-3038 V3020 6: C ATTEMPT ATTACK W/ WEAPON(NOT GUN/KNIFE) 3653-3653 V3543 7: C ATTEMPT ATTACK W/ WEAPON(NOT GUN/KNIFE) 4268-4268 V406 1: C HIT, SLAPPED, KNOCKED DOWN 579-579 V929 2: C HIT, SLAPPED, KNOCKED DOWN 1194-1194 V1452 3: C HIT, SLAPPED, KNOCKED DOWN 1809-1809 V1975 4: C HIT, SLAPPED, KNOCKED DOWN 2424-2424 V2498 5: C HIT, SLAPPED, KNOCKED DOWN 3039-3039 V3021 6: C HIT, SLAPPED, KNOCKED DOWN 3654-3654 V3544 7: C HIT, SLAPPED, KNOCKED DOWN 4269-4269 V407 1: C GRABBED, HELD, TRIPPED, JUMPED, ETC. 580-580 V930 2: C GRABBED, HELD, TRIPPED, JUMPED, ETC. 1195-1195 V1453 3: C GRABBED, HELD, TRIPPED, JUMPED, ETC. 1810-1810 V1976 4: C GRABBED, HELD, TRIPPED, JUMPED, ETC. 2425-2425 V2499 5: C GRABBED, HELD, TRIPPED, JUMPED, ETC. 3040-3040 V3022 6: C GRABBED, HELD, TRIPPED, JUMPED, ETC. 3655-3655 V3545 7: C GRABBED, HELD, TRIPPED, JUMPED, ETC. 4270-4270 V408 1: C OTHER 581-581 V931 2: C OTHER 1196-1196 V1454 3: C OTHER 1811-1811 V1977 4: C OTHER 2426-2426 V2500 5: C OTHER 3041-3041 V3023 6: C OTHER 3656-3656 V3546 7: C OTHER 4271-4271 V409 1: RESIDUE HOW WERE YOU ATTACKED? 582-582 V932 2: RESIDUE HOW WERE YOU ATTACKED? 1197-1197 V1455 3: RESIDUE HOW WERE YOU ATTACKED? 1812-1812 Page 41 V1978 4: RESIDUE HOW WERE YOU ATTACKED? 2427-2427 V2501 5: RESIDUE HOW WERE YOU ATTACKED? 3042-3042 V3024 6: RESIDUE HOW WERE YOU ATTACKED? 3657-3657 V3547 7: RESIDUE HOW WERE YOU ATTACKED? 4272-4272 V410 1: OFFENDER THREATEN HURT BEFORE ATTACK? 583-583 V933 2: OFFENDER THREATEN HURT BEFORE ATTACK? 1198-1198 V1456 3: OFFENDER THREATEN HURT BEFORE ATTACK? 1813-1813 V1979 4: OFFENDER THREATEN HURT BEFORE ATTACK? 2428-2428 V2502 5: OFFENDER THREATEN HURT BEFORE ATTACK? 3043-3043 V3025 6: OFFENDER THREATEN HURT BEFORE ATTACK? 3658-3658 V3548 7: OFFENDER THREATEN HURT BEFORE ATTACK? 4273-4273 V411 1: LI WHAT WERE THE INJURIES YOU SUFFERED? 584-584 V934 2: LI WHAT WERE THE INJURIES YOU SUFFERED? 1199-1199 V1457 3: LI WHAT WERE THE INJURIES YOU SUFFERED? 1814-1814 V1980 4: LI WHAT WERE THE INJURIES YOU SUFFERED? 2429-2429 V2503 5: LI WHAT WERE THE INJURIES YOU SUFFERED? 3044-3044 V3026 6: LI WHAT WERE THE INJURIES YOU SUFFERED? 3659-3659 V3549 7: LI WHAT WERE THE INJURIES YOU SUFFERED? 4274-4274 V412 1: C NONE 585-585 V935 2: C NONE 1200-1200 V1458 3: C NONE 1815-1815 V1981 4: C NONE 2430-2430 V2504 5: C NONE 3045-3045 V3027 6: C NONE 3660-3660 V3550 7: C NONE 4275-4275 V413 1: C RAPED 586-586 V936 2: C RAPED 1201-1201 V1459 3: C RAPED 1816-1816 V1982 4: C RAPED 2431-2431 V2505 5: C RAPED 3046-3046 V3028 6: C RAPED 3661-3661 V3551 7: C RAPED 4276-4276 V414 1: C ATTEMPTED RAPE 587-587 V937 2: C ATTEMPTED RAPE 1202-1202 V1460 3: C ATTEMPTED RAPE 1817-1817 V1983 4: C ATTEMPTED RAPE 2432-2432 V2506 5: C ATTEMPTED RAPE 3047-3047 V3029 6: C ATTEMPTED RAPE 3662-3662 V3552 7: C ATTEMPTED RAPE 4277-4277 V415 1: C SEXUAL ASSAULT (NOT RAPE OR ATTEMPT) 588-588 V938 2: C SEXUAL ASSAULT (NOT RAPE OR ATTEMPT) 1203-1203 V1461 3: C SEXUAL ASSAULT (NOT RAPE OR ATTEMPT) 1818-1818 V1984 4: C SEXUAL ASSAULT (NOT RAPE OR ATTEMPT) 2433-2433 V2507 5: C SEXUAL ASSAULT (NOT RAPE OR ATTEMPT) 3048-3048 V3030 6: C SEXUAL ASSAULT (NOT RAPE OR ATTEMPT) 3663-3663 V3553 7: C SEXUAL ASSAULT (NOT RAPE OR ATTEMPT) 4278-4278 V416 1: C KNIFE OR STAB WOUNDS 589-589 V939 2: C KNIFE OR STAB WOUNDS 1204-1204 V1462 3: C KNIFE OR STAB WOUNDS 1819-1819 V1985 4: C KNIFE OR STAB WOUNDS 2434-2434 V2508 5: C KNIFE OR STAB WOUNDS 3049-3049 V3031 6: C KNIFE OR STAB WOUNDS 3664-3664 V3554 7: C KNIFE OR STAB WOUNDS 4279-4279 Page 42 V417 1: C GUN SHOT, BULLET WOUNDS 590-590 V940 2: C GUN SHOT, BULLET WOUNDS 1205-1205 V1463 3: C GUN SHOT, BULLET WOUNDS 1820-1820 V1986 4: C GUN SHOT, BULLET WOUNDS 2435-2435 V2509 5: C GUN SHOT, BULLET WOUNDS 3050-3050 V3032 6: C GUN SHOT, BULLET WOUNDS 3665-3665 V3555 7: C GUN SHOT, BULLET WOUNDS 4280-4280 V418 1: C BROKEN BONES OR TEETH KNOCKED OUT 591-591 V941 2: C BROKEN BONES OR TEETH KNOCKED OUT 1206-1206 V1464 3: C BROKEN BONES OR TEETH KNOCKED OUT 1821-1821 V1987 4: C BROKEN BONES OR TEETH KNOCKED OUT 2436-2436 V2510 5: C BROKEN BONES OR TEETH KNOCKED OUT 3051-3051 V3033 6: C BROKEN BONES OR TEETH KNOCKED OUT 3666-3666 V3556 7: C BROKEN BONES OR TEETH KNOCKED OUT 4281-4281 V419 1: C INTERNAL INJURIES 592-592 V942 2: C INTERNAL INJURIES 1207-1207 V1465 3: C INTERNAL INJURIES 1822-1822 V1988 4: C INTERNAL INJURIES 2437-2437 V2511 5: C INTERNAL INJURIES 3052-3052 V3034 6: C INTERNAL INJURIES 3667-3667 V3557 7: C INTERNAL INJURIES 4282-4282 V420 1: C KNOCKED UNCONSCIOUS 593-593 V943 2: C KNOCKED UNCONSCIOUS 1208-1208 V1466 3: C KNOCKED UNCONSCIOUS 1823-1823 V1989 4: C KNOCKED UNCONSCIOUS 2438-2438 V2512 5: C KNOCKED UNCONSCIOUS 3053-3053 V3035 6: C KNOCKED UNCONSCIOUS 3668-3668 V3558 7: C KNOCKED UNCONSCIOUS 4283-4283 V421 1: C BRUISE,B EYE,CUT,SCRATCH,SWELL,C TEETH 594-594 V944 2: C BRUISE,B EYE,CUT,SCRATCH,SWELL,C TEETH 1209-1209 V1467 3: C BRUISE,B EYE,CUT,SCRATCH,SWELL,C TEETH 1824-1824 V1990 4: C BRUISE,B EYE,CUT,SCRATCH,SWELL,C TEETH 2439-2439 V2513 5: C BRUISE,B EYE,CUT,SCRATCH,SWELL,C TEETH 3054-3054 V3036 6: C BRUISE,B EYE,CUT,SCRATCH,SWELL,C TEETH 3669-3669 V3559 7: C BRUISE,B EYE,CUT,SCRATCH,SWELL,C TEETH 4284-4284 V422 1: C OTHER 595-595 V945 2: C OTHER 1210-1210 V1468 3: C OTHER 1825-1825 V1991 4: C OTHER 2440-2440 V2514 5: C OTHER 3055-3055 V3037 6: C OTHER 3670-3670 V3560 7: C OTHER 4285-4285 V423 1: RESIDUE INJURIES YOU SUFFERED 596-596 V946 2: RESIDUE INJURIES YOU SUFFERED 1211-1211 V1469 3: RESIDUE INJURIES YOU SUFFERED 1826-1826 V1992 4: RESIDUE INJURIES YOU SUFFERED 2441-2441 V2515 5: RESIDUE INJURIES YOU SUFFERED 3056-3056 V3038 6: RESIDUE INJURIES YOU SUFFERED 3671-3671 V3561 7: RESIDUE INJURIES YOU SUFFERED 4286-4286 V424 1: ANY INJURIES BY WEAPON(NOT GUN OR KNIFE)? 597-597 V947 2: ANY INJURIES BY WEAPON(NOT GUN OR KNIFE)? 1212-1212 V1470 3: ANY INJURIES BY WEAPON(NOT GUN OR KNIFE)? 1827-1827 V1993 4: ANY INJURIES BY WEAPON(NOT GUN OR KNIFE)? 2442-2442 V2516 5: ANY INJURIES BY WEAPON(NOT GUN OR KNIFE)? 3057-3057 Page 43 V3039 6: ANY INJURIES BY WEAPON(NOT GUN OR KNIFE)? 3672-3672 V3562 7: ANY INJURIES BY WEAPON(NOT GUN OR KNIFE)? 4287-4287 V425 1: FIRST INJURY BY OTHER WEAPON 598-599 V948 2: FIRST INJURY BY OTHER WEAPON 1213-1214 V1471 3: FIRST INJURY BY OTHER WEAPON 1828-1829 V1994 4: FIRST INJURY BY OTHER WEAPON 2443-2444 V2517 5: FIRST INJURY BY OTHER WEAPON 3058-3059 V3040 6: FIRST INJURY BY OTHER WEAPON 3673-3674 V3563 7: FIRST INJURY BY OTHER WEAPON 4288-4289 V426 1: SECOND INJURY BY OTHER WEAPON 600-601 V949 2: SECOND INJURY BY OTHER WEAPON 1215-1216 V1472 3: SECOND INJURY BY OTHER WEAPON 1830-1831 V1995 4: SECOND INJURY BY OTHER WEAPON 2445-2446 V2518 5: SECOND INJURY BY OTHER WEAPON 3060-3061 V3041 6: SECOND INJURY BY OTHER WEAPON 3675-3676 V3564 7: SECOND INJURY BY OTHER WEAPON 4290-4291 V427 1: THIRD INJURY BY OTHER WEAPON 602-603 V950 2: THIRD INJURY BY OTHER WEAPON 1217-1218 V1473 3: THIRD INJURY BY OTHER WEAPON 1832-1833 V1996 4: THIRD INJURY BY OTHER WEAPON 2447-2448 V2519 5: THIRD INJURY BY OTHER WEAPON 3062-3063 V3042 6: THIRD INJURY BY OTHER WEAPON 3677-3678 V3565 7: THIRD INJURY BY OTHER WEAPON 4292-4293 V428 1: RECEIVE MED CARE, INCLUDING SELF TREAT.? 604-604 V951 2: RECEIVE MED CARE, INCLUDING SELF TREAT.? 1219-1219 V1474 3: RECEIVE MED CARE, INCLUDING SELF TREAT.? 1834-1834 V1997 4: RECEIVE MED CARE, INCLUDING SELF TREAT.? 2449-2449 V2520 5: RECEIVE MED CARE, INCLUDING SELF TREAT.? 3064-3064 V3043 6: RECEIVE MED CARE, INCLUDING SELF TREAT.? 3679-3679 V3566 7: RECEIVE MED CARE, INCLUDING SELF TREAT.? 4294-4294 V429 1: LI WHERE DID YOU RECEIVE THIS CARE? 605-605 V952 2: LI WHERE DID YOU RECEIVE THIS CARE? 1220-1220 V1475 3: LI WHERE DID YOU RECEIVE THIS CARE? 1835-1835 V1998 4: LI WHERE DID YOU RECEIVE THIS CARE? 2450-2450 V2521 5: LI WHERE DID YOU RECEIVE THIS CARE? 3065-3065 V3044 6: LI WHERE DID YOU RECEIVE THIS CARE? 3680-3680 V3567 7: LI WHERE DID YOU RECEIVE THIS CARE? 4295-4295 V430 1: C AT THE SCENE 606-606 V953 2: C AT THE SCENE 1221-1221 V1476 3: C AT THE SCENE 1836-1836 V1999 4: C AT THE SCENE 2451-2451 V2522 5: C AT THE SCENE 3066-3066 V3045 6: C AT THE SCENE 3681-3681 V3568 7: C AT THE SCENE 4296-4296 V431 1: C AT HOME/NEIGHBOR'S/FRIEND'S 607-607 V954 2: C AT HOME/NEIGHBOR'S/FRIEND'S 1222-1222 V1477 3: C AT HOME/NEIGHBOR'S/FRIEND'S 1837-1837 V2000 4: C AT HOME/NEIGHBOR'S/FRIEND'S 2452-2452 V2523 5: C AT HOME/NEIGHBOR'S/FRIEND'S 3067-3067 V3046 6: C AT HOME/NEIGHBOR'S/FRIEND'S 3682-3682 V3569 7: C AT HOME/NEIGHBOR'S/FRIEND'S 4297-4297 V432 1: C HEALTH UNIT AT WORK/SCHOOL/PARK, ETC. 608-608 V955 2: C HEALTH UNIT AT WORK/SCHOOL/PARK, ETC. 1223-1223 V1478 3: C HEALTH UNIT AT WORK/SCHOOL/PARK, ETC. 1838-1838 Page 44 V2001 4: C HEALTH UNIT AT WORK/SCHOOL/PARK, ETC. 2453-2453 V2524 5: C HEALTH UNIT AT WORK/SCHOOL/PARK, ETC. 3068-3068 V3047 6: C HEALTH UNIT AT WORK/SCHOOL/PARK, ETC. 3683-3683 V3570 7: C HEALTH UNIT AT WORK/SCHOOL/PARK, ETC. 4298-4298 V433 1: C DOCTOR'S OFFICE/HEALTH CLINIC 609-609 V956 2: C DOCTOR'S OFFICE/HEALTH CLINIC 1224-1224 V1479 3: C DOCTOR'S OFFICE/HEALTH CLINIC 1839-1839 V2002 4: C DOCTOR'S OFFICE/HEALTH CLINIC 2454-2454 V2525 5: C DOCTOR'S OFFICE/HEALTH CLINIC 3069-3069 V3048 6: C DOCTOR'S OFFICE/HEALTH CLINIC 3684-3684 V3571 7: C DOCTOR'S OFFICE/HEALTH CLINIC 4299-4299 V434 1: C EMERGENCY ROOM/EMERGENCY CLINIC 610-610 V957 2: C EMERGENCY ROOM/EMERGENCY CLINIC 1225-1225 V1480 3: C EMERGENCY ROOM/EMERGENCY CLINIC 1840-1840 V2003 4: C EMERGENCY ROOM/EMERGENCY CLINIC 2455-2455 V2526 5: C EMERGENCY ROOM/EMERGENCY CLINIC 3070-3070 V3049 6: C EMERGENCY ROOM/EMERGENCY CLINIC 3685-3685 V3572 7: C EMERGENCY ROOM/EMERGENCY CLINIC 4300-4300 V435 1: C HOSPITAL (OTHER THAN EMERGENCY ROOM) 611-611 V958 2: C HOSPITAL (OTHER THAN EMERGENCY ROOM) 1226-1226 V1481 3: C HOSPITAL (OTHER THAN EMERGENCY ROOM) 1841-1841 V2004 4: C HOSPITAL (OTHER THAN EMERGENCY ROOM) 2456-2456 V2527 5: C HOSPITAL (OTHER THAN EMERGENCY ROOM) 3071-3071 V3050 6: C HOSPITAL (OTHER THAN EMERGENCY ROOM) 3686-3686 V3573 7: C HOSPITAL (OTHER THAN EMERGENCY ROOM) 4301-4301 V436 1: C OTHER 612-612 V959 2: C OTHER 1227-1227 V1482 3: C OTHER 1842-1842 V2005 4: C OTHER 2457-2457 V2528 5: C OTHER 3072-3072 V3051 6: C OTHER 3687-3687 V3574 7: C OTHER 4302-4302 V437 1: RESIDUE WHERE DID YOU RECEIVE THIS CARE? 613-613 V960 2: RESIDUE WHERE DID YOU RECEIVE THIS CARE? 1228-1228 V1483 3: RESIDUE WHERE DID YOU RECEIVE THIS CARE? 1843-1843 V2006 4: RESIDUE WHERE DID YOU RECEIVE THIS CARE? 2458-2458 V2529 5: RESIDUE WHERE DID YOU RECEIVE THIS CARE? 3073-3073 V3052 6: RESIDUE WHERE DID YOU RECEIVE THIS CARE? 3688-3688 V3575 7: RESIDUE WHERE DID YOU RECEIVE THIS CARE? 4303-4303 V438 1: DID YOU STAY OVERNIGHT IN THE HOSPITAL? 614-614 V961 2: DID YOU STAY OVERNIGHT IN THE HOSPITAL? 1229-1229 V1484 3: DID YOU STAY OVERNIGHT IN THE HOSPITAL? 1844-1844 V2007 4: DID YOU STAY OVERNIGHT IN THE HOSPITAL? 2459-2459 V2530 5: DID YOU STAY OVERNIGHT IN THE HOSPITAL? 3074-3074 V3053 6: DID YOU STAY OVERNIGHT IN THE HOSPITAL? 3689-3689 V3576 7: DID YOU STAY OVERNIGHT IN THE HOSPITAL? 4304-4304 V439 1: HOW MANY DAYS STAY IN HOSPITAL? 615-617 V962 2: HOW MANY DAYS STAY IN HOSPITAL? 1230-1232 V1485 3: HOW MANY DAYS STAY IN HOSPITAL? 1845-1847 V2008 4: HOW MANY DAYS STAY IN HOSPITAL? 2460-2462 V2531 5: HOW MANY DAYS STAY IN HOSPITAL? 3075-3077 V3054 6: HOW MANY DAYS STAY IN HOSPITAL? 3690-3692 V3577 7: HOW MANY DAYS STAY IN HOSPITAL? 4305-4307 Page 45 V440 1: MED INS,MEDICAID,VET ADMIN,PUB WELFARE? 618-618 V963 2: MED INS,MEDICAID,VET ADMIN,PUB WELFARE? 1233-1233 V1486 3: MED INS,MEDICAID,VET ADMIN,PUB WELFARE? 1848-1848 V2009 4: MED INS,MEDICAID,VET ADMIN,PUB WELFARE? 2463-2463 V2532 5: MED INS,MEDICAID,VET ADMIN,PUB WELFARE? 3078-3078 V3055 6: MED INS,MEDICAID,VET ADMIN,PUB WELFARE? 3693-3693 V3578 7: MED INS,MEDICAID,VET ADMIN,PUB WELFARE? 4308-4308 V441 1: TOT AMOUNT MED EXPENSES FROM INCIDENT 619-623 V964 2: TOT AMOUNT MED EXPENSES FROM INCIDENT 1234-1238 V1487 3: TOT AMOUNT MED EXPENSES FROM INCIDENT 1849-1853 V2010 4: TOT AMOUNT MED EXPENSES FROM INCIDENT 2464-2468 V2533 5: TOT AMOUNT MED EXPENSES FROM INCIDENT 3079-3083 V3056 6: TOT AMOUNT MED EXPENSES FROM INCIDENT 3694-3698 V3579 7: TOT AMOUNT MED EXPENSES FROM INCIDENT 4309-4313 V442 1: DID YOU ACT TO PROTECT SELF OR PROPERTY? 624-624 V965 2: DID YOU ACT TO PROTECT SELF OR PROPERTY? 1239-1239 V1488 3: DID YOU ACT TO PROTECT SELF OR PROPERTY? 1854-1854 V2011 4: DID YOU ACT TO PROTECT SELF OR PROPERTY? 2469-2469 V2534 5: DID YOU ACT TO PROTECT SELF OR PROPERTY? 3084-3084 V3057 6: DID YOU ACT TO PROTECT SELF OR PROPERTY? 3699-3699 V3580 7: DID YOU ACT TO PROTECT SELF OR PROPERTY? 4314-4314 V443 1: DO/TRY TO DO ANYTHING ABOUT THE INCIDENT? 625-625 V966 2: DO/TRY TO DO ANYTHING ABOUT THE INCIDENT? 1240-1240 V1489 3: DO/TRY TO DO ANYTHING ABOUT THE INCIDENT? 1855-1855 V2012 4: DO/TRY TO DO ANYTHING ABOUT THE INCIDENT? 2470-2470 V2535 5: DO/TRY TO DO ANYTHING ABOUT THE INCIDENT? 3085-3085 V3058 6: DO/TRY TO DO ANYTHING ABOUT THE INCIDENT? 3700-3700 V3581 7: DO/TRY TO DO ANYTHING ABOUT THE INCIDENT? 4315-4315 V444 1: LI WHAT DID YOU DO? 626-626 V967 2: LI WHAT DID YOU DO? 1241-1241 V1490 3: LI WHAT DID YOU DO? 1856-1856 V2013 4: LI WHAT DID YOU DO? 2471-2471 V2536 5: LI WHAT DID YOU DO? 3086-3086 V3059 6: LI WHAT DID YOU DO? 3701-3701 V3582 7: LI WHAT DID YOU DO? 4316-4316 V445 1: C ATTACKED OFFENDER WITH GUN; FIRED GUN 627-627 V968 2: C ATTACKED OFFENDER WITH GUN; FIRED GUN 1242-1242 V1491 3: C ATTACKED OFFENDER WITH GUN; FIRED GUN 1857-1857 V2014 4: C ATTACKED OFFENDER WITH GUN; FIRED GUN 2472-2472 V2537 5: C ATTACKED OFFENDER WITH GUN; FIRED GUN 3087-3087 V3060 6: C ATTACKED OFFENDER WITH GUN; FIRED GUN 3702-3702 V3583 7: C ATTACKED OFFENDER WITH GUN; FIRED GUN 4317-4317 V446 1: C ATTACKED WITH OTHER WEAPON 628-628 V969 2: C ATTACKED WITH OTHER WEAPON 1243-1243 V1492 3: C ATTACKED WITH OTHER WEAPON 1858-1858 V2015 4: C ATTACKED WITH OTHER WEAPON 2473-2473 V2538 5: C ATTACKED WITH OTHER WEAPON 3088-3088 V3061 6: C ATTACKED WITH OTHER WEAPON 3703-3703 V3584 7: C ATTACKED WITH OTHER WEAPON 4318-4318 V447 1: C ATTACKED W/O WEAPON (HIT, KICKED, ETC.) 629-629 V970 2: C ATTACKED W/O WEAPON (HIT, KICKED, ETC.) 1244-1244 V1493 3: C ATTACKED W/O WEAPON (HIT, KICKED, ETC.) 1859-1859 V2016 4: C ATTACKED W/O WEAPON (HIT, KICKED, ETC.) 2474-2474 V2539 5: C ATTACKED W/O WEAPON (HIT, KICKED, ETC.) 3089-3089 Page 46 V3062 6: C ATTACKED W/O WEAPON (HIT, KICKED, ETC.) 3704-3704 V3585 7: C ATTACKED W/O WEAPON (HIT, KICKED, ETC.) 4319-4319 V448 1: C THREATENED OFFENDER WITH GUN 630-630 V971 2: C THREATENED OFFENDER WITH GUN 1245-1245 V1494 3: C THREATENED OFFENDER WITH GUN 1860-1860 V2017 4: C THREATENED OFFENDER WITH GUN 2475-2475 V2540 5: C THREATENED OFFENDER WITH GUN 3090-3090 V3063 6: C THREATENED OFFENDER WITH GUN 3705-3705 V3586 7: C THREATENED OFFENDER WITH GUN 4320-4320 V449 1: C THREATENED OFFENDER WITH OTHER WEAPON 631-631 V972 2: C THREATENED OFFENDER WITH OTHER WEAPON 1246-1246 V1495 3: C THREATENED OFFENDER WITH OTHER WEAPON 1861-1861 V2018 4: C THREATENED OFFENDER WITH OTHER WEAPON 2476-2476 V2541 5: C THREATENED OFFENDER WITH OTHER WEAPON 3091-3091 V3064 6: C THREATENED OFFENDER WITH OTHER WEAPON 3706-3706 V3587 7: C THREATENED OFFENDER WITH OTHER WEAPON 4321-4321 V450 1: C THREATENED TO INJURE, NO WEAPON 632-632 V973 2: C THREATENED TO INJURE, NO WEAPON 1247-1247 V1496 3: C THREATENED TO INJURE, NO WEAPON 1862-1862 V2019 4: C THREATENED TO INJURE, NO WEAPON 2477-2477 V2542 5: C THREATENED TO INJURE, NO WEAPON 3092-3092 V3065 6: C THREATENED TO INJURE, NO WEAPON 3707-3707 V3588 7: C THREATENED TO INJURE, NO WEAPON 4322-4322 V451 1: C STRUGGLE,DUCK,BLOCK BLOWS,HELD PROPERTY 633-633 V974 2: C STRUGGLE,DUCK,BLOCK BLOWS,HELD PROPERTY 1248-1248 V1497 3: C STRUGGLE,DUCK,BLOCK BLOWS,HELD PROPERTY 1863-1863 V2020 4: C STRUGGLE,DUCK,BLOCK BLOWS,HELD PROPERTY 2478-2478 V2543 5: C STRUGGLE,DUCK,BLOCK BLOWS,HELD PROPERTY 3093-3093 V3066 6: C STRUGGLE,DUCK,BLOCK BLOWS,HELD PROPERTY 3708-3708 V3589 7: C STRUGGLE,DUCK,BLOCK BLOWS,HELD PROPERTY 4323-4323 V452 1: C CHASED, TRIED TO CATCH OR HOLD OFFENDER 634-634 V975 2: C CHASED, TRIED TO CATCH OR HOLD OFFENDER 1249-1249 V1498 3: C CHASED, TRIED TO CATCH OR HOLD OFFENDER 1864-1864 V2021 4: C CHASED, TRIED TO CATCH OR HOLD OFFENDER 2479-2479 V2544 5: C CHASED, TRIED TO CATCH OR HOLD OFFENDER 3094-3094 V3067 6: C CHASED, TRIED TO CATCH OR HOLD OFFENDER 3709-3709 V3590 7: C CHASED, TRIED TO CATCH OR HOLD OFFENDER 4324-4324 V453 1: C YELLED, TURNED ON LIGHTS, THREATENED 635-635 V976 2: C YELLED, TURNED ON LIGHTS, THREATENED 1250-1250 V1499 3: C YELLED, TURNED ON LIGHTS, THREATENED 1865-1865 V2022 4: C YELLED, TURNED ON LIGHTS, THREATENED 2480-2480 V2545 5: C YELLED, TURNED ON LIGHTS, THREATENED 3095-3095 V3068 6: C YELLED, TURNED ON LIGHTS, THREATENED 3710-3710 V3591 7: C YELLED, TURNED ON LIGHTS, THREATENED 4325-4325 V454 1: C COOPERATED, OR PRETENDED TO 636-636 V977 2: C COOPERATED, OR PRETENDED TO 1251-1251 V1500 3: C COOPERATED, OR PRETENDED TO 1866-1866 V2023 4: C COOPERATED, OR PRETENDED TO 2481-2481 V2546 5: C COOPERATED, OR PRETENDED TO 3096-3096 V3069 6: C COOPERATED, OR PRETENDED TO 3711-3711 V3592 7: C COOPERATED, OR PRETENDED TO 4326-4326 V455 1: C ARGUED,REASONED,PLEADED,BARGAINED,ETC. 637-637 V978 2: C ARGUED,REASONED,PLEADED,BARGAINED,ETC. 1252-1252 V1501 3: C ARGUED,REASONED,PLEADED,BARGAINED,ETC. 1867-1867 Page 47 V2024 4: C ARGUED,REASONED,PLEADED,BARGAINED,ETC. 2482-2482 V2547 5: C ARGUED,REASONED,PLEADED,BARGAINED,ETC. 3097-3097 V3070 6: C ARGUED,REASONED,PLEADED,BARGAINED,ETC. 3712-3712 V3593 7: C ARGUED,REASONED,PLEADED,BARGAINED,ETC. 4327-4327 V456 1: C RAN/DROVE AWAY OR TRIED;HID,LOCKED DOOR 638-638 V979 2: C RAN/DROVE AWAY OR TRIED;HID,LOCKED DOOR 1253-1253 V1502 3: C RAN/DROVE AWAY OR TRIED;HID,LOCKED DOOR 1868-1868 V2025 4: C RAN/DROVE AWAY OR TRIED;HID,LOCKED DOOR 2483-2483 V2548 5: C RAN/DROVE AWAY OR TRIED;HID,LOCKED DOOR 3098-3098 V3071 6: C RAN/DROVE AWAY OR TRIED;HID,LOCKED DOOR 3713-3713 V3594 7: C RAN/DROVE AWAY OR TRIED;HID,LOCKED DOOR 4328-4328 V457 1: C CALLED POLICE OR GUARD 639-639 V980 2: C CALLED POLICE OR GUARD 1254-1254 V1503 3: C CALLED POLICE OR GUARD 1869-1869 V2026 4: C CALLED POLICE OR GUARD 2484-2484 V2549 5: C CALLED POLICE OR GUARD 3099-3099 V3072 6: C CALLED POLICE OR GUARD 3714-3714 V3595 7: C CALLED POLICE OR GUARD 4329-4329 V458 1: C TRIED ATTRACT ATT. OR HELP, WARN OTHERS 640-640 V981 2: C TRIED ATTRACT ATT. OR HELP, WARN OTHERS 1255-1255 V1504 3: C TRIED ATTRACT ATT. OR HELP, WARN OTHERS 1870-1870 V2027 4: C TRIED ATTRACT ATT. OR HELP, WARN OTHERS 2485-2485 V2550 5: C TRIED ATTRACT ATT. OR HELP, WARN OTHERS 3100-3100 V3073 6: C TRIED ATTRACT ATT. OR HELP, WARN OTHERS 3715-3715 V3596 7: C TRIED ATTRACT ATT. OR HELP, WARN OTHERS 4330-4330 V459 1: C SCREAMED FROM PAIN OR FEAR 641-641 V982 2: C SCREAMED FROM PAIN OR FEAR 1256-1256 V1505 3: C SCREAMED FROM PAIN OR FEAR 1871-1871 V2028 4: C SCREAMED FROM PAIN OR FEAR 2486-2486 V2551 5: C SCREAMED FROM PAIN OR FEAR 3101-3101 V3074 6: C SCREAMED FROM PAIN OR FEAR 3716-3716 V3597 7: C SCREAMED FROM PAIN OR FEAR 4331-4331 V460 1: C OTHER - SPECIFY 642-642 V983 2: C OTHER - SPECIFY 1257-1257 V1506 3: C OTHER - SPECIFY 1872-1872 V2029 4: C OTHER - SPECIFY 2487-2487 V2552 5: C OTHER - SPECIFY 3102-3102 V3075 6: C OTHER - SPECIFY 3717-3717 V3598 7: C OTHER - SPECIFY 4332-4332 V461 1: RESIDUE WHAT DID YOU DO? 643-643 V984 2: RESIDUE WHAT DID YOU DO? 1258-1258 V1507 3: RESIDUE WHAT DID YOU DO? 1873-1873 V2030 4: RESIDUE WHAT DID YOU DO? 2488-2488 V2553 5: RESIDUE WHAT DID YOU DO? 3103-3103 V3076 6: RESIDUE WHAT DID YOU DO? 3718-3718 V3599 7: RESIDUE WHAT DID YOU DO? 4333-4333 V462 1: LI BEFORE, AFTER, SAME TIME AS INJURY? 644-644 V985 2: LI BEFORE, AFTER, SAME TIME AS INJURY? 1259-1259 V1508 3: LI BEFORE, AFTER, SAME TIME AS INJURY? 1874-1874 V2031 4: LI BEFORE, AFTER, SAME TIME AS INJURY? 2489-2489 V2554 5: LI BEFORE, AFTER, SAME TIME AS INJURY? 3104-3104 V3077 6: LI BEFORE, AFTER, SAME TIME AS INJURY? 3719-3719 V3600 7: LI BEFORE, AFTER, SAME TIME AS INJURY? 4334-4334 Page 48 V463 1: C ACTIONS TAKEN BEFORE INJURY 645-645 V986 2: C ACTIONS TAKEN BEFORE INJURY 1260-1260 V1509 3: C ACTIONS TAKEN BEFORE INJURY 1875-1875 V2032 4: C ACTIONS TAKEN BEFORE INJURY 2490-2490 V2555 5: C ACTIONS TAKEN BEFORE INJURY 3105-3105 V3078 6: C ACTIONS TAKEN BEFORE INJURY 3720-3720 V3601 7: C ACTIONS TAKEN BEFORE INJURY 4335-4335 V464 1: C ACTIONS TAKEN AFTER INJURY 646-646 V987 2: C ACTIONS TAKEN AFTER INJURY 1261-1261 V1510 3: C ACTIONS TAKEN AFTER INJURY 1876-1876 V2033 4: C ACTIONS TAKEN AFTER INJURY 2491-2491 V2556 5: C ACTIONS TAKEN AFTER INJURY 3106-3106 V3079 6: C ACTIONS TAKEN AFTER INJURY 3721-3721 V3602 7: C ACTIONS TAKEN AFTER INJURY 4336-4336 V465 1: C ACTIONS TAKEN AT SAME TIME AS INJURY 647-647 V988 2: C ACTIONS TAKEN AT SAME TIME AS INJURY 1262-1262 V1511 3: C ACTIONS TAKEN AT SAME TIME AS INJURY 1877-1877 V2034 4: C ACTIONS TAKEN AT SAME TIME AS INJURY 2492-2492 V2557 5: C ACTIONS TAKEN AT SAME TIME AS INJURY 3107-3107 V3080 6: C ACTIONS TAKEN AT SAME TIME AS INJURY 3722-3722 V3603 7: C ACTIONS TAKEN AT SAME TIME AS INJURY 4337-4337 V466 1: RESIDUE BEFORE,AFTER,SAME TIME AS INJURY? 648-648 V989 2: RESIDUE BEFORE,AFTER,SAME TIME AS INJURY? 1263-1263 V1512 3: RESIDUE BEFORE,AFTER,SAME TIME AS INJURY? 1878-1878 V2035 4: RESIDUE BEFORE,AFTER,SAME TIME AS INJURY? 2493-2493 V2558 5: RESIDUE BEFORE,AFTER,SAME TIME AS INJURY? 3108-3108 V3081 6: RESIDUE BEFORE,AFTER,SAME TIME AS INJURY? 3723-3723 V3604 7: RESIDUE BEFORE,AFTER,SAME TIME AS INJURY? 4338-4338 V467 1: DID YOUR ACTION(S) HELP THE SITUATION? 649-649 V990 2: DID YOUR ACTION(S) HELP THE SITUATION? 1264-1264 V1513 3: DID YOUR ACTION(S) HELP THE SITUATION? 1879-1879 V2036 4: DID YOUR ACTION(S) HELP THE SITUATION? 2494-2494 V2559 5: DID YOUR ACTION(S) HELP THE SITUATION? 3109-3109 V3082 6: DID YOUR ACTION(S) HELP THE SITUATION? 3724-3724 V3605 7: DID YOUR ACTION(S) HELP THE SITUATION? 4339-4339 V468 1: LI HOW WERE THEY HELPFUL? 650-650 V991 2: LI HOW WERE THEY HELPFUL? 1265-1265 V1514 3: LI HOW WERE THEY HELPFUL? 1880-1880 V2037 4: LI HOW WERE THEY HELPFUL? 2495-2495 V2560 5: LI HOW WERE THEY HELPFUL? 3110-3110 V3083 6: LI HOW WERE THEY HELPFUL? 3725-3725 V3606 7: LI HOW WERE THEY HELPFUL? 4340-4340 V469 1: C HELP AVOID INJURY/GREATER INJURY-SELF 651-651 V992 2: C HELP AVOID INJURY/GREATER INJURY-SELF 1266-1266 V1515 3: C HELP AVOID INJURY/GREATER INJURY-SELF 1881-1881 V2038 4: C HELP AVOID INJURY/GREATER INJURY-SELF 2496-2496 V2561 5: C HELP AVOID INJURY/GREATER INJURY-SELF 3111-3111 V3084 6: C HELP AVOID INJURY/GREATER INJURY-SELF 3726-3726 V3607 7: C HELP AVOID INJURY/GREATER INJURY-SELF 4341-4341 V470 1: C SCARED OR CHASED OFFENDER OFF 652-652 V993 2: C SCARED OR CHASED OFFENDER OFF 1267-1267 V1516 3: C SCARED OR CHASED OFFENDER OFF 1882-1882 V2039 4: C SCARED OR CHASED OFFENDER OFF 2497-2497 V2562 5: C SCARED OR CHASED OFFENDER OFF 3112-3112 Page 49 V3085 6: C SCARED OR CHASED OFFENDER OFF 3727-3727 V3608 7: C SCARED OR CHASED OFFENDER OFF 4342-4342 V471 1: C HELP RESPONDENT GET AWAY FROM OFFENDER 653-653 V994 2: C HELP RESPONDENT GET AWAY FROM OFFENDER 1268-1268 V1517 3: C HELP RESPONDENT GET AWAY FROM OFFENDER 1883-1883 V2040 4: C HELP RESPONDENT GET AWAY FROM OFFENDER 2498-2498 V2563 5: C HELP RESPONDENT GET AWAY FROM OFFENDER 3113-3113 V3086 6: C HELP RESPONDENT GET AWAY FROM OFFENDER 3728-3728 V3609 7: C HELP RESPONDENT GET AWAY FROM OFFENDER 4343-4343 V472 1: C PROTECTED PROPERTY 654-654 V995 2: C PROTECTED PROPERTY 1269-1269 V1518 3: C PROTECTED PROPERTY 1884-1884 V2041 4: C PROTECTED PROPERTY 2499-2499 V2564 5: C PROTECTED PROPERTY 3114-3114 V3087 6: C PROTECTED PROPERTY 3729-3729 V3610 7: C PROTECTED PROPERTY 4344-4344 V473 1: C PROTECTED OTHER PEOPLE 655-655 V996 2: C PROTECTED OTHER PEOPLE 1270-1270 V1519 3: C PROTECTED OTHER PEOPLE 1885-1885 V2042 4: C PROTECTED OTHER PEOPLE 2500-2500 V2565 5: C PROTECTED OTHER PEOPLE 3115-3115 V3088 6: C PROTECTED OTHER PEOPLE 3730-3730 V3611 7: C PROTECTED OTHER PEOPLE 4345-4345 V474 1: C OTHER 656-656 V997 2: C OTHER 1271-1271 V1520 3: C OTHER 1886-1886 V2043 4: C OTHER 2501-2501 V2566 5: C OTHER 3116-3116 V3089 6: C OTHER 3731-3731 V3612 7: C OTHER 4346-4346 V475 1: RESIDUE HOW WERE THEY HELPFUL? 657-657 V998 2: RESIDUE HOW WERE THEY HELPFUL? 1272-1272 V1521 3: RESIDUE HOW WERE THEY HELPFUL? 1887-1887 V2044 4: RESIDUE HOW WERE THEY HELPFUL? 2502-2502 V2567 5: RESIDUE HOW WERE THEY HELPFUL? 3117-3117 V3090 6: RESIDUE HOW WERE THEY HELPFUL? 3732-3732 V3613 7: RESIDUE HOW WERE THEY HELPFUL? 4347-4347 V476 1: DID YOUR ACTION(S) WORSEN THE SITUATION? 658-658 V999 2: DID YOUR ACTION(S) WORSEN THE SITUATION? 1273-1273 V1522 3: DID YOUR ACTION(S) WORSEN THE SITUATION? 1888-1888 V2045 4: DID YOUR ACTION(S) WORSEN THE SITUATION? 2503-2503 V2568 5: DID YOUR ACTION(S) WORSEN THE SITUATION? 3118-3118 V3091 6: DID YOUR ACTION(S) WORSEN THE SITUATION? 3733-3733 V3614 7: DID YOUR ACTION(S) WORSEN THE SITUATION? 4348-4348 V477 1: LI HOW DID THEY MAKE THE SITUATION WORSE? 659-659 V1000 2: LI HOW DID THEY MAKE THE SITUATION WORSE? 1274-1274 V1523 3: LI HOW DID THEY MAKE THE SITUATION WORSE? 1889-1889 V2046 4: LI HOW DID THEY MAKE THE SITUATION WORSE? 2504-2504 V2569 5: LI HOW DID THEY MAKE THE SITUATION WORSE? 3119-3119 V3092 6: LI HOW DID THEY MAKE THE SITUATION WORSE? 3734-3734 V3615 7: LI HOW DID THEY MAKE THE SITUATION WORSE? 4349-4349 V478 1: C LED TO INJURY/GREATER INJURY-SELF 660-660 V1001 2: C LED TO INJURY/GREATER INJURY-SELF 1275-1275 V1524 3: C LED TO INJURY/GREATER INJURY-SELF 1890-1890 Page 50 V2047 4: C LED TO INJURY/GREATER INJURY-SELF 2505-2505 V2570 5: C LED TO INJURY/GREATER INJURY-SELF 3120-3120 V3093 6: C LED TO INJURY/GREATER INJURY-SELF 3735-3735 V3616 7: C LED TO INJURY/GREATER INJURY-SELF 4350-4350 V479 1: C GREATER LOSS OR DAMAGE OF PROPERTY 661-661 V1002 2: C GREATER LOSS OR DAMAGE OF PROPERTY 1276-1276 V1525 3: C GREATER LOSS OR DAMAGE OF PROPERTY 1891-1891 V2048 4: C GREATER LOSS OR DAMAGE OF PROPERTY 2506-2506 V2571 5: C GREATER LOSS OR DAMAGE OF PROPERTY 3121-3121 V3094 6: C GREATER LOSS OR DAMAGE OF PROPERTY 3736-3736 V3617 7: C GREATER LOSS OR DAMAGE OF PROPERTY 4351-4351 V480 1: C OTHER PEOPLE GOT HURT (WORSE) 662-662 V1003 2: C OTHER PEOPLE GOT HURT (WORSE) 1277-1277 V1526 3: C OTHER PEOPLE GOT HURT (WORSE) 1892-1892 V2049 4: C OTHER PEOPLE GOT HURT (WORSE) 2507-2507 V2572 5: C OTHER PEOPLE GOT HURT (WORSE) 3122-3122 V3095 6: C OTHER PEOPLE GOT HURT (WORSE) 3737-3737 V3618 7: C OTHER PEOPLE GOT HURT (WORSE) 4352-4352 V481 1: C OFFENDER GOT AWAY 663-663 V1004 2: C OFFENDER GOT AWAY 1278-1278 V1527 3: C OFFENDER GOT AWAY 1893-1893 V2050 4: C OFFENDER GOT AWAY 2508-2508 V2573 5: C OFFENDER GOT AWAY 3123-3123 V3096 6: C OFFENDER GOT AWAY 3738-3738 V3619 7: C OFFENDER GOT AWAY 4353-4353 V482 1: C MADE OFFENDER ANGRIER, MORE AGGRESSIVE 664-664 V1005 2: C MADE OFFENDER ANGRIER, MORE AGGRESSIVE 1279-1279 V1528 3: C MADE OFFENDER ANGRIER, MORE AGGRESSIVE 1894-1894 V2051 4: C MADE OFFENDER ANGRIER, MORE AGGRESSIVE 2509-2509 V2574 5: C MADE OFFENDER ANGRIER, MORE AGGRESSIVE 3124-3124 V3097 6: C MADE OFFENDER ANGRIER, MORE AGGRESSIVE 3739-3739 V3620 7: C MADE OFFENDER ANGRIER, MORE AGGRESSIVE 4354-4354 V483 1: C OTHER - SPECIFY 665-665 V1006 2: C OTHER - SPECIFY 1280-1280 V1529 3: C OTHER - SPECIFY 1895-1895 V2052 4: C OTHER - SPECIFY 2510-2510 V2575 5: C OTHER - SPECIFY 3125-3125 V3098 6: C OTHER - SPECIFY 3740-3740 V3621 7: C OTHER - SPECIFY 4355-4355 V484 1: RESIDUE MADE THE SITUATION WORSE 666-666 V1007 2: RESIDUE MADE THE SITUATION WORSE 1281-1281 V1530 3: RESIDUE MADE THE SITUATION WORSE 1896-1896 V2053 4: RESIDUE MADE THE SITUATION WORSE 2511-2511 V2576 5: RESIDUE MADE THE SITUATION WORSE 3126-3126 V3099 6: RESIDUE MADE THE SITUATION WORSE 3741-3741 V3622 7: RESIDUE MADE THE SITUATION WORSE 4356-4356 V485 1: 13 OR OLDER THERE BESIDES YOU + OFFENDER? 667-667 V1008 2: 13 OR OLDER THERE BESIDES YOU + OFFENDER? 1282-1282 V1531 3: 13 OR OLDER THERE BESIDES YOU + OFFENDER? 1897-1897 V2054 4: 13 OR OLDER THERE BESIDES YOU + OFFENDER? 2512-2512 V2577 5: 13 OR OLDER THERE BESIDES YOU + OFFENDER? 3127-3127 V3100 6: 13 OR OLDER THERE BESIDES YOU + OFFENDER? 3742-3742 V3623 7: 13 OR OLDER THERE BESIDES YOU + OFFENDER? 4357-4357 Page 51 V486 1: ACTIONS OF OTHER(S) HELP THE SITUATION? 668-668 V1009 2: ACTIONS OF OTHER(S) HELP THE SITUATION? 1283-1283 V1532 3: ACTIONS OF OTHER(S) HELP THE SITUATION? 1898-1898 V2055 4: ACTIONS OF OTHER(S) HELP THE SITUATION? 2513-2513 V2578 5: ACTIONS OF OTHER(S) HELP THE SITUATION? 3128-3128 V3101 6: ACTIONS OF OTHER(S) HELP THE SITUATION? 3743-3743 V3624 7: ACTIONS OF OTHER(S) HELP THE SITUATION? 4358-4358 V487 1: LI HOW DID THEY HELP THE SITUATION? 669-669 V1010 2: LI HOW DID THEY HELP THE SITUATION? 1284-1284 V1533 3: LI HOW DID THEY HELP THE SITUATION? 1899-1899 V2056 4: LI HOW DID THEY HELP THE SITUATION? 2514-2514 V2579 5: LI HOW DID THEY HELP THE SITUATION? 3129-3129 V3102 6: LI HOW DID THEY HELP THE SITUATION? 3744-3744 V3625 7: LI HOW DID THEY HELP THE SITUATION? 4359-4359 V488 1: C AVOID INJURY/GREATER INJURY-RESPONDENT 670-670 V1011 2: C AVOID INJURY/GREATER INJURY-RESPONDENT 1285-1285 V1534 3: C AVOID INJURY/GREATER INJURY-RESPONDENT 1900-1900 V2057 4: C AVOID INJURY/GREATER INJURY-RESPONDENT 2515-2515 V2580 5: C AVOID INJURY/GREATER INJURY-RESPONDENT 3130-3130 V3103 6: C AVOID INJURY/GREATER INJURY-RESPONDENT 3745-3745 V3626 7: C AVOID INJURY/GREATER INJURY-RESPONDENT 4360-4360 V489 1: C SCARED OR CHASED OFFENDER OFF 671-671 V1012 2: C SCARED OR CHASED OFFENDER OFF 1286-1286 V1535 3: C SCARED OR CHASED OFFENDER OFF 1901-1901 V2058 4: C SCARED OR CHASED OFFENDER OFF 2516-2516 V2581 5: C SCARED OR CHASED OFFENDER OFF 3131-3131 V3104 6: C SCARED OR CHASED OFFENDER OFF 3746-3746 V3627 7: C SCARED OR CHASED OFFENDER OFF 4361-4361 V490 1: C HELP RESPONDENT GET AWAY FROM OFFENDER 672-672 V1013 2: C HELP RESPONDENT GET AWAY FROM OFFENDER 1287-1287 V1536 3: C HELP RESPONDENT GET AWAY FROM OFFENDER 1902-1902 V2059 4: C HELP RESPONDENT GET AWAY FROM OFFENDER 2517-2517 V2582 5: C HELP RESPONDENT GET AWAY FROM OFFENDER 3132-3132 V3105 6: C HELP RESPONDENT GET AWAY FROM OFFENDER 3747-3747 V3628 7: C HELP RESPONDENT GET AWAY FROM OFFENDER 4362-4362 V491 1: C PROTECTED PROPERTY 673-673 V1014 2: C PROTECTED PROPERTY 1288-1288 V1537 3: C PROTECTED PROPERTY 1903-1903 V2060 4: C PROTECTED PROPERTY 2518-2518 V2583 5: C PROTECTED PROPERTY 3133-3133 V3106 6: C PROTECTED PROPERTY 3748-3748 V3629 7: C PROTECTED PROPERTY 4363-4363 V492 1: C PROTECTED OTHER PEOPLE 674-674 V1015 2: C PROTECTED OTHER PEOPLE 1289-1289 V1538 3: C PROTECTED OTHER PEOPLE 1904-1904 V2061 4: C PROTECTED OTHER PEOPLE 2519-2519 V2584 5: C PROTECTED OTHER PEOPLE 3134-3134 V3107 6: C PROTECTED OTHER PEOPLE 3749-3749 V3630 7: C PROTECTED OTHER PEOPLE 4364-4364 V493 1: C OTHER 675-675 V1016 2: C OTHER 1290-1290 V1539 3: C OTHER 1905-1905 V2062 4: C OTHER 2520-2520 V2585 5: C OTHER 3135-3135 Page 52 V3108 6: C OTHER 3750-3750 V3631 7: C OTHER 4365-4365 V494 1: RESIDUE HOW DID THEY HELP THE SITUATION? 676-676 V1017 2: RESIDUE HOW DID THEY HELP THE SITUATION? 1291-1291 V1540 3: RESIDUE HOW DID THEY HELP THE SITUATION? 1906-1906 V2063 4: RESIDUE HOW DID THEY HELP THE SITUATION? 2521-2521 V2586 5: RESIDUE HOW DID THEY HELP THE SITUATION? 3136-3136 V3109 6: RESIDUE HOW DID THEY HELP THE SITUATION? 3751-3751 V3632 7: RESIDUE HOW DID THEY HELP THE SITUATION? 4366-4366 V495 1: ACTIONS OF OTHER(S) WORSEN THE SITUATION? 677-677 V1018 2: ACTIONS OF OTHER(S) WORSEN THE SITUATION? 1292-1292 V1541 3: ACTIONS OF OTHER(S) WORSEN THE SITUATION? 1907-1907 V2064 4: ACTIONS OF OTHER(S) WORSEN THE SITUATION? 2522-2522 V2587 5: ACTIONS OF OTHER(S) WORSEN THE SITUATION? 3137-3137 V3110 6: ACTIONS OF OTHER(S) WORSEN THE SITUATION? 3752-3752 V3633 7: ACTIONS OF OTHER(S) WORSEN THE SITUATION? 4367-4367 V496 1: LI HOW DID THEY MAKE THE SITUATION WORSE? 678-678 V1019 2: LI HOW DID THEY MAKE THE SITUATION WORSE? 1293-1293 V1542 3: LI HOW DID THEY MAKE THE SITUATION WORSE? 1908-1908 V2065 4: LI HOW DID THEY MAKE THE SITUATION WORSE? 2523-2523 V2588 5: LI HOW DID THEY MAKE THE SITUATION WORSE? 3138-3138 V3111 6: LI HOW DID THEY MAKE THE SITUATION WORSE? 3753-3753 V3634 7: LI HOW DID THEY MAKE THE SITUATION WORSE? 4368-4368 V497 1: C LED TO INJURY/GREATER INJURY-RESPONDENT 679-679 V1020 2: C LED TO INJURY/GREATER INJURY-RESPONDENT 1294-1294 V1543 3: C LED TO INJURY/GREATER INJURY-RESPONDENT 1909-1909 V2066 4: C LED TO INJURY/GREATER INJURY-RESPONDENT 2524-2524 V2589 5: C LED TO INJURY/GREATER INJURY-RESPONDENT 3139-3139 V3112 6: C LED TO INJURY/GREATER INJURY-RESPONDENT 3754-3754 V3635 7: C LED TO INJURY/GREATER INJURY-RESPONDENT 4369-4369 V498 1: C GREATER LOSS OR DAMAGE OF PROPERTY 680-680 V1021 2: C GREATER LOSS OR DAMAGE OF PROPERTY 1295-1295 V1544 3: C GREATER LOSS OR DAMAGE OF PROPERTY 1910-1910 V2067 4: C GREATER LOSS OR DAMAGE OF PROPERTY 2525-2525 V2590 5: C GREATER LOSS OR DAMAGE OF PROPERTY 3140-3140 V3113 6: C GREATER LOSS OR DAMAGE OF PROPERTY 3755-3755 V3636 7: C GREATER LOSS OR DAMAGE OF PROPERTY 4370-4370 V499 1: C OTHER PEOPLE GOT HURT (WORSE) 681-681 V1022 2: C OTHER PEOPLE GOT HURT (WORSE) 1296-1296 V1545 3: C OTHER PEOPLE GOT HURT (WORSE) 1911-1911 V2068 4: C OTHER PEOPLE GOT HURT (WORSE) 2526-2526 V2591 5: C OTHER PEOPLE GOT HURT (WORSE) 3141-3141 V3114 6: C OTHER PEOPLE GOT HURT (WORSE) 3756-3756 V3637 7: C OTHER PEOPLE GOT HURT (WORSE) 4371-4371 V500 1: C OFFENDER GOT AWAY 682-682 V1023 2: C OFFENDER GOT AWAY 1297-1297 V1546 3: C OFFENDER GOT AWAY 1912-1912 V2069 4: C OFFENDER GOT AWAY 2527-2527 V2592 5: C OFFENDER GOT AWAY 3142-3142 V3115 6: C OFFENDER GOT AWAY 3757-3757 V3638 7: C OFFENDER GOT AWAY 4372-4372 V501 1: C MADE OFFENDER ANGRIER, MORE AGGRESSIVE 683-683 V1024 2: C MADE OFFENDER ANGRIER, MORE AGGRESSIVE 1298-1298 V1547 3: C MADE OFFENDER ANGRIER, MORE AGGRESSIVE 1913-1913 Page 53 V2070 4: C MADE OFFENDER ANGRIER, MORE AGGRESSIVE 2528-2528 V2593 5: C MADE OFFENDER ANGRIER, MORE AGGRESSIVE 3143-3143 V3116 6: C MADE OFFENDER ANGRIER, MORE AGGRESSIVE 3758-3758 V3639 7: C MADE OFFENDER ANGRIER, MORE AGGRESSIVE 4373-4373 V502 1: C OTHER 684-684 V1025 2: C OTHER 1299-1299 V1548 3: C OTHER 1914-1914 V2071 4: C OTHER 2529-2529 V2594 5: C OTHER 3144-3144 V3117 6: C OTHER 3759-3759 V3640 7: C OTHER 4374-4374 V503 1: RESIDUE MADE THE SITUATION WORSE 685-685 V1026 2: RESIDUE MADE THE SITUATION WORSE 1300-1300 V1549 3: RESIDUE MADE THE SITUATION WORSE 1915-1915 V2072 4: RESIDUE MADE THE SITUATION WORSE 2530-2530 V2595 5: RESIDUE MADE THE SITUATION WORSE 3145-3145 V3118 6: RESIDUE MADE THE SITUATION WORSE 3760-3760 V3641 7: RESIDUE MADE THE SITUATION WORSE 4375-4375 V504 1: OTHERS HARMED,THREATENED,ROBBED? (13+) 686-686 V1027 2: OTHERS HARMED,THREATENED,ROBBED? (13+) 1301-1301 V1550 3: OTHERS HARMED,THREATENED,ROBBED? (13+) 1916-1916 V2073 4: OTHERS HARMED,THREATENED,ROBBED? (13+) 2531-2531 V2596 5: OTHERS HARMED,THREATENED,ROBBED? (13+) 3146-3146 V3119 6: OTHERS HARMED,THREATENED,ROBBED? (13+) 3761-3761 V3642 7: OTHERS HARMED,THREATENED,ROBBED? (13+) 4376-4376 V505 1: HOW MANY?(NOT YOU OR OFFENDER)(ORIGINAL) 687-688 V1028 2: HOW MANY?(NOT YOU OR OFFENDER)(ORIGINAL) 1302-1303 V1551 3: HOW MANY?(NOT YOU OR OFFENDER)(ORIGINAL) 1917-1918 V2074 4: HOW MANY?(NOT YOU OR OFFENDER)(ORIGINAL) 2532-2533 V2597 5: HOW MANY?(NOT YOU OR OFFENDER)(ORIGINAL) 3147-3148 V3120 6: HOW MANY?(NOT YOU OR OFFENDER)(ORIGINAL) 3762-3763 V3643 7: HOW MANY?(NOT YOU OR OFFENDER)(ORIGINAL) 4377-4378 V506 1: HOW MANY?(NOT YOU OR OFFENDER)(ALLOCATED) 689-690 V1029 2: HOW MANY?(NOT YOU OR OFFENDER)(ALLOCATED) 1304-1305 V1552 3: HOW MANY?(NOT YOU OR OFFENDER)(ALLOCATED) 1919-1920 V2075 4: HOW MANY?(NOT YOU OR OFFENDER)(ALLOCATED) 2534-2535 V2598 5: HOW MANY?(NOT YOU OR OFFENDER)(ALLOCATED) 3149-3150 V3121 6: HOW MANY?(NOT YOU OR OFFENDER)(ALLOCATED) 3764-3765 V3644 7: HOW MANY?(NOT YOU OR OFFENDER)(ALLOCATED) 4379-4380 V507 1: NO. ARE MEMBER OF YOUR HH NOW?(ORIGINAL) 691-692 V1030 2: NO. ARE MEMBER OF YOUR HH NOW?(ORIGINAL) 1306-1307 V1553 3: NO. ARE MEMBER OF YOUR HH NOW?(ORIGINAL) 1921-1922 V2076 4: NO. ARE MEMBER OF YOUR HH NOW?(ORIGINAL) 2536-2537 V2599 5: NO. ARE MEMBER OF YOUR HH NOW?(ORIGINAL) 3151-3152 V3122 6: NO. ARE MEMBER OF YOUR HH NOW?(ORIGINAL) 3766-3767 V3645 7: NO. ARE MEMBER OF YOUR HH NOW?(ORIGINAL) 4381-4382 V508 1: NO. ARE MEMBER OF YOUR HH NOW?(ALLOCATED) 693-694 V1031 2: NO. ARE MEMBER OF YOUR HH NOW?(ALLOCATED) 1308-1309 V1554 3: NO. ARE MEMBER OF YOUR HH NOW?(ALLOCATED) 1923-1924 V2077 4: NO. ARE MEMBER OF YOUR HH NOW?(ALLOCATED) 2538-2539 V2600 5: NO. ARE MEMBER OF YOUR HH NOW?(ALLOCATED) 3153-3154 V3123 6: NO. ARE MEMBER OF YOUR HH NOW?(ALLOCATED) 3768-3769 V3646 7: NO. ARE MEMBER OF YOUR HH NOW?(ALLOCATED) 4383-4384 Page 54 V509 1: RESP USE/THREAT PHY FORCE AGAINST OFFEND? 695-695 V1032 2: RESP USE/THREAT PHY FORCE AGAINST OFFEND? 1310-1310 V1555 3: RESP USE/THREAT PHY FORCE AGAINST OFFEND? 1925-1925 V2078 4: RESP USE/THREAT PHY FORCE AGAINST OFFEND? 2540-2540 V2601 5: RESP USE/THREAT PHY FORCE AGAINST OFFEND? 3155-3155 V3124 6: RESP USE/THREAT PHY FORCE AGAINST OFFEND? 3770-3770 V3647 7: RESP USE/THREAT PHY FORCE AGAINST OFFEND? 4385-4385 V510 1: FIRST TO USE/THREAT PHYSICAL FORCE? 696-696 V1033 2: FIRST TO USE/THREAT PHYSICAL FORCE? 1311-1311 V1556 3: FIRST TO USE/THREAT PHYSICAL FORCE? 1926-1926 V2079 4: FIRST TO USE/THREAT PHYSICAL FORCE? 2541-2541 V2602 5: FIRST TO USE/THREAT PHYSICAL FORCE? 3156-3156 V3125 6: FIRST TO USE/THREAT PHYSICAL FORCE? 3771-3771 V3648 7: FIRST TO USE/THREAT PHYSICAL FORCE? 4386-4386 V511 1: KNOW/LEARN ANYTHING ABOUT OFFENDER(S)? 697-697 V1034 2: KNOW/LEARN ANYTHING ABOUT OFFENDER(S)? 1312-1312 V1557 3: KNOW/LEARN ANYTHING ABOUT OFFENDER(S)? 1927-1927 V2080 4: KNOW/LEARN ANYTHING ABOUT OFFENDER(S)? 2542-2542 V2603 5: KNOW/LEARN ANYTHING ABOUT OFFENDER(S)? 3157-3157 V3126 6: KNOW/LEARN ANYTHING ABOUT OFFENDER(S)? 3772-3772 V3649 7: KNOW/LEARN ANYTHING ABOUT OFFENDER(S)? 4387-4387 V512 1: HOW SURE ARE YOU OF THIS INFORMATION? 698-698 V1035 2: HOW SURE ARE YOU OF THIS INFORMATION? 1313-1313 V1558 3: HOW SURE ARE YOU OF THIS INFORMATION? 1928-1928 V2081 4: HOW SURE ARE YOU OF THIS INFORMATION? 2543-2543 V2604 5: HOW SURE ARE YOU OF THIS INFORMATION? 3158-3158 V3127 6: HOW SURE ARE YOU OF THIS INFORMATION? 3773-3773 V3650 7: HOW SURE ARE YOU OF THIS INFORMATION? 4388-4388 V513 1: LI HOW DID YOU LEARN ABOUT OFFENDER(S)? 699-699 V1036 2: LI HOW DID YOU LEARN ABOUT OFFENDER(S)? 1314-1314 V1559 3: LI HOW DID YOU LEARN ABOUT OFFENDER(S)? 1929-1929 V2082 4: LI HOW DID YOU LEARN ABOUT OFFENDER(S)? 2544-2544 V2605 5: LI HOW DID YOU LEARN ABOUT OFFENDER(S)? 3159-3159 V3128 6: LI HOW DID YOU LEARN ABOUT OFFENDER(S)? 3774-3774 V3651 7: LI HOW DID YOU LEARN ABOUT OFFENDER(S)? 4389-4389 V514 1: C RESPONDENT SAW OR HEARD OFFENDER 700-700 V1037 2: C RESPONDENT SAW OR HEARD OFFENDER 1315-1315 V1560 3: C RESPONDENT SAW OR HEARD OFFENDER 1930-1930 V2083 4: C RESPONDENT SAW OR HEARD OFFENDER 2545-2545 V2606 5: C RESPONDENT SAW OR HEARD OFFENDER 3160-3160 V3129 6: C RESPONDENT SAW OR HEARD OFFENDER 3775-3775 V3652 7: C RESPONDENT SAW OR HEARD OFFENDER 4390-4390 V515 1: C FROM OTHER HH MEMBER WHO WAS EYEWITNESS 701-701 V1038 2: C FROM OTHER HH MEMBER WHO WAS EYEWITNESS 1316-1316 V1561 3: C FROM OTHER HH MEMBER WHO WAS EYEWITNESS 1931-1931 V2084 4: C FROM OTHER HH MEMBER WHO WAS EYEWITNESS 2546-2546 V2607 5: C FROM OTHER HH MEMBER WHO WAS EYEWITNESS 3161-3161 V3130 6: C FROM OTHER HH MEMBER WHO WAS EYEWITNESS 3776-3776 V3653 7: C FROM OTHER HH MEMBER WHO WAS EYEWITNESS 4391-4391 V516 1: C FROM OTHER EYEWITNESS(ES) (NOT HH MEM) 702-702 V1039 2: C FROM OTHER EYEWITNESS(ES) (NOT HH MEM) 1317-1317 V1562 3: C FROM OTHER EYEWITNESS(ES) (NOT HH MEM) 1932-1932 V2085 4: C FROM OTHER EYEWITNESS(ES) (NOT HH MEM) 2547-2547 V2608 5: C FROM OTHER EYEWITNESS(ES) (NOT HH MEM) 3162-3162 Page 55 V3131 6: C FROM OTHER EYEWITNESS(ES) (NOT HH MEM) 3777-3777 V3654 7: C FROM OTHER EYEWITNESS(ES) (NOT HH MEM) 4392-4392 V517 1: C FROM POLICE 703-703 V1040 2: C FROM POLICE 1318-1318 V1563 3: C FROM POLICE 1933-1933 V2086 4: C FROM POLICE 2548-2548 V2609 5: C FROM POLICE 3163-3163 V3132 6: C FROM POLICE 3778-3778 V3655 7: C FROM POLICE 4393-4393 V518 1: C OTHER PERSON (NOT EYEWITNESS) 704-704 V1041 2: C OTHER PERSON (NOT EYEWITNESS) 1319-1319 V1564 3: C OTHER PERSON (NOT EYEWITNESS) 1934-1934 V2087 4: C OTHER PERSON (NOT EYEWITNESS) 2549-2549 V2610 5: C OTHER PERSON (NOT EYEWITNESS) 3164-3164 V3133 6: C OTHER PERSON (NOT EYEWITNESS) 3779-3779 V3656 7: C OTHER PERSON (NOT EYEWITNESS) 4394-4394 V519 1: C OFFENDER(S) ADMITTED IT 705-705 V1042 2: C OFFENDER(S) ADMITTED IT 1320-1320 V1565 3: C OFFENDER(S) ADMITTED IT 1935-1935 V2088 4: C OFFENDER(S) ADMITTED IT 2550-2550 V2611 5: C OFFENDER(S) ADMITTED IT 3165-3165 V3134 6: C OFFENDER(S) ADMITTED IT 3780-3780 V3657 7: C OFFENDER(S) ADMITTED IT 4395-4395 V520 1: C OFFENDER(S) HAD THREATENED TO DO IT 706-706 V1043 2: C OFFENDER(S) HAD THREATENED TO DO IT 1321-1321 V1566 3: C OFFENDER(S) HAD THREATENED TO DO IT 1936-1936 V2089 4: C OFFENDER(S) HAD THREATENED TO DO IT 2551-2551 V2612 5: C OFFENDER(S) HAD THREATENED TO DO IT 3166-3166 V3135 6: C OFFENDER(S) HAD THREATENED TO DO IT 3781-3781 V3658 7: C OFFENDER(S) HAD THREATENED TO DO IT 4396-4396 V521 1: C STOLEN PROP FOUND ON OFFENDER'S PROP 707-707 V1044 2: C STOLEN PROP FOUND ON OFFENDER'S PROP 1322-1322 V1567 3: C STOLEN PROP FOUND ON OFFENDER'S PROP 1937-1937 V2090 4: C STOLEN PROP FOUND ON OFFENDER'S PROP 2552-2552 V2613 5: C STOLEN PROP FOUND ON OFFENDER'S PROP 3167-3167 V3136 6: C STOLEN PROP FOUND ON OFFENDER'S PROP 3782-3782 V3659 7: C STOLEN PROP FOUND ON OFFENDER'S PROP 4397-4397 V522 1: C MOTIVE, OPPORTUNITY, HAD DONE IT BEFORE 708-708 V1045 2: C MOTIVE, OPPORTUNITY, HAD DONE IT BEFORE 1323-1323 V1568 3: C MOTIVE, OPPORTUNITY, HAD DONE IT BEFORE 1938-1938 V2091 4: C MOTIVE, OPPORTUNITY, HAD DONE IT BEFORE 2553-2553 V2614 5: C MOTIVE, OPPORTUNITY, HAD DONE IT BEFORE 3168-3168 V3137 6: C MOTIVE, OPPORTUNITY, HAD DONE IT BEFORE 3783-3783 V3660 7: C MOTIVE, OPPORTUNITY, HAD DONE IT BEFORE 4398-4398 V523 1: C OTHER 709-709 V1046 2: C OTHER 1324-1324 V1569 3: C OTHER 1939-1939 V2092 4: C OTHER 2554-2554 V2615 5: C OTHER 3169-3169 V3138 6: C OTHER 3784-3784 V3661 7: C OTHER 4399-4399 V524 1: RESIDUE HOW YOU LEARNED ABOUT OFFENDER(S) 710-710 V1047 2: RESIDUE HOW YOU LEARNED ABOUT OFFENDER(S) 1325-1325 V1570 3: RESIDUE HOW YOU LEARNED ABOUT OFFENDER(S) 1940-1940 Page 56 V2093 4: RESIDUE HOW YOU LEARNED ABOUT OFFENDER(S) 2555-2555 V2616 5: RESIDUE HOW YOU LEARNED ABOUT OFFENDER(S) 3170-3170 V3139 6: RESIDUE HOW YOU LEARNED ABOUT OFFENDER(S) 3785-3785 V3662 7: RESIDUE HOW YOU LEARNED ABOUT OFFENDER(S) 4400-4400 V525 1: LI WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 711-711 V1048 2: LI WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 1326-1326 V1571 3: LI WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 1941-1941 V2094 4: LI WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 2556-2556 V2617 5: LI WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 3171-3171 V3140 6: LI WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 3786-3786 V3663 7: LI WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 4401-4401 V526 1: C SOMETHING TAKEN WITHOUT PERMISSION 712-712 V1049 2: C SOMETHING TAKEN WITHOUT PERMISSION 1327-1327 V1572 3: C SOMETHING TAKEN WITHOUT PERMISSION 1942-1942 V2095 4: C SOMETHING TAKEN WITHOUT PERMISSION 2557-2557 V2618 5: C SOMETHING TAKEN WITHOUT PERMISSION 3172-3172 V3141 6: C SOMETHING TAKEN WITHOUT PERMISSION 3787-3787 V3664 7: C SOMETHING TAKEN WITHOUT PERMISSION 4402-4402 V527 1: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO TAKE SOMETHING 713-713 V1050 2: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO TAKE SOMETHING 1328-1328 V1573 3: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO TAKE SOMETHING 1943-1943 V2096 4: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO TAKE SOMETHING 2558-2558 V2619 5: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO TAKE SOMETHING 3173-3173 V3142 6: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO TAKE SOMETHING 3788-3788 V3665 7: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO TAKE SOMETHING 4403-4403 V528 1: C HARASSED, ARGUMENT, ABUSIVE LANGUAGE 714-714 V1051 2: C HARASSED, ARGUMENT, ABUSIVE LANGUAGE 1329-1329 V1574 3: C HARASSED, ARGUMENT, ABUSIVE LANGUAGE 1944-1944 V2097 4: C HARASSED, ARGUMENT, ABUSIVE LANGUAGE 2559-2559 V2620 5: C HARASSED, ARGUMENT, ABUSIVE LANGUAGE 3174-3174 V3143 6: C HARASSED, ARGUMENT, ABUSIVE LANGUAGE 3789-3789 V3666 7: C HARASSED, ARGUMENT, ABUSIVE LANGUAGE 4404-4404 V529 1: C FORCIBLE ENTRY OR ATTEMPT-HOUSE/APT. 715-715 V1052 2: C FORCIBLE ENTRY OR ATTEMPT-HOUSE/APT. 1330-1330 V1575 3: C FORCIBLE ENTRY OR ATTEMPT-HOUSE/APT. 1945-1945 V2098 4: C FORCIBLE ENTRY OR ATTEMPT-HOUSE/APT. 2560-2560 V2621 5: C FORCIBLE ENTRY OR ATTEMPT-HOUSE/APT. 3175-3175 V3144 6: C FORCIBLE ENTRY OR ATTEMPT-HOUSE/APT. 3790-3790 V3667 7: C FORCIBLE ENTRY OR ATTEMPT-HOUSE/APT. 4405-4405 V530 1: C FORCIBLE ENTRY OR ATTEMPT-CAR 716-716 V1053 2: C FORCIBLE ENTRY OR ATTEMPT-CAR 1331-1331 V1576 3: C FORCIBLE ENTRY OR ATTEMPT-CAR 1946-1946 V2099 4: C FORCIBLE ENTRY OR ATTEMPT-CAR 2561-2561 V2622 5: C FORCIBLE ENTRY OR ATTEMPT-CAR 3176-3176 V3145 6: C FORCIBLE ENTRY OR ATTEMPT-CAR 3791-3791 V3668 7: C FORCIBLE ENTRY OR ATTEMPT-CAR 4406-4406 V531 1: C DAMAGED OR DESTROYED PROPERTY 717-717 V1054 2: C DAMAGED OR DESTROYED PROPERTY 1332-1332 V1577 3: C DAMAGED OR DESTROYED PROPERTY 1947-1947 V2100 4: C DAMAGED OR DESTROYED PROPERTY 2562-2562 V2623 5: C DAMAGED OR DESTROYED PROPERTY 3177-3177 V3146 6: C DAMAGED OR DESTROYED PROPERTY 3792-3792 V3669 7: C DAMAGED OR DESTROYED PROPERTY 4407-4407 Page 57 V532 1: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO DAMAGE PROPERTY 718-718 V1055 2: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO DAMAGE PROPERTY 1333-1333 V1578 3: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO DAMAGE PROPERTY 1948-1948 V2101 4: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO DAMAGE PROPERTY 2563-2563 V2624 5: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO DAMAGE PROPERTY 3178-3178 V3147 6: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO DAMAGE PROPERTY 3793-3793 V3670 7: C ATTEMPT OR THREAT TO DAMAGE PROPERTY 4408-4408 V533 1: C OTHER 719-719 V1056 2: C OTHER 1334-1334 V1579 3: C OTHER 1949-1949 V2102 4: C OTHER 2564-2564 V2625 5: C OTHER 3179-3179 V3148 6: C OTHER 3794-3794 V3671 7: C OTHER 4409-4409 V534 1: RESIDUE WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 720-720 V1057 2: RESIDUE WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 1335-1335 V1580 3: RESIDUE WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 1950-1950 V2103 4: RESIDUE WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 2565-2565 V2626 5: RESIDUE WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 3180-3180 V3149 6: RESIDUE WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 3795-3795 V3672 7: RESIDUE WHAT ACTUALLY HAPPENED? 4410-4410 V535 1: ONLY ONE OR MORE THAN ONE OFFENDER? 721-721 V1058 2: ONLY ONE OR MORE THAN ONE OFFENDER? 1336-1336 V1581 3: ONLY ONE OR MORE THAN ONE OFFENDER? 1951-1951 V2104 4: ONLY ONE OR MORE THAN ONE OFFENDER? 2566-2566 V2627 5: ONLY ONE OR MORE THAN ONE OFFENDER? 3181-3181 V3150 6: ONLY ONE OR MORE THAN ONE OFFENDER? 3796-3796 V3673 7: ONLY ONE OR MORE THAN ONE OFFENDER? 4411-4411 V536 1: YOU KNOW ANYTHING ABOUT ONE OF OFFENDERS? 722-722 V1059 2: YOU KNOW ANYTHING ABOUT ONE OF OFFENDERS? 1337-1337 V1582 3: YOU KNOW ANYTHING ABOUT ONE OF OFFENDERS? 1952-1952 V2105 4: YOU KNOW ANYTHING ABOUT ONE OF OFFENDERS? 2567-2567 V2628 5: YOU KNOW ANYTHING ABOUT ONE OF OFFENDERS? 3182-3182 V3151 6: YOU KNOW ANYTHING ABOUT ONE OF OFFENDERS? 3797-3797 V3674 7: YOU KNOW ANYTHING ABOUT ONE OF OFFENDERS? 4412-4412 V537 1: WAS THE OFFENDER MALE OR FEMALE? 723-723 V1060 2: WAS THE OFFENDER MALE OR FEMALE? 1338-1338 V1583 3: WAS THE OFFENDER MALE OR FEMALE? 1953-1953 V2106 4: WAS THE OFFENDER MALE OR FEMALE? 2568-2568 V2629 5: WAS THE OFFENDER MALE OR FEMALE? 3183-3183 V3152 6: WAS THE OFFENDER MALE OR FEMALE? 3798-3798 V3675 7: WAS THE OFFENDER MALE OR FEMALE? 4413-4413 V538 1: HOW OLD WOULD YOU SAY THE OFFENDER WAS? 724-724 V1061 2: HOW OLD WOULD YOU SAY THE OFFENDER WAS? 1339-1339 V1584 3: HOW OLD WOULD YOU SAY THE OFFENDER WAS? 1954-1954 V2107 4: HOW OLD WOULD YOU SAY THE OFFENDER WAS? 2569-2569 V2630 5: HOW OLD WOULD YOU SAY THE OFFENDER WAS? 3184-3184 V3153 6: HOW OLD WOULD YOU SAY THE OFFENDER WAS? 3799-3799 V3676 7: HOW OLD WOULD YOU SAY THE OFFENDER WAS? 4414-4414 V539 1: WAS OFFENDER A MEMBER OF A STREET GANG? 725-725 V1062 2: WAS OFFENDER A MEMBER OF A STREET GANG? 1340-1340 V1585 3: WAS OFFENDER A MEMBER OF A STREET GANG? 1955-1955 V2108 4: WAS OFFENDER A MEMBER OF A STREET GANG? 2570-2570 V2631 5: WAS OFFENDER A MEMBER OF A STREET GANG? 3185-3185 Page 58 V3154 6: WAS OFFENDER A MEMBER OF A STREET GANG? 3800-3800 V3677 7: WAS OFFENDER A MEMBER OF A STREET GANG? 4415-4415 V540 1: WAS THE OFFENDER DRINKING OR ON DRUGS? 726-726 V1063 2: WAS THE OFFENDER DRINKING OR ON DRUGS? 1341-1341 V1586 3: WAS THE OFFENDER DRINKING OR ON DRUGS? 1956-1956 V2109 4: WAS THE OFFENDER DRINKING OR ON DRUGS? 2571-2571 V2632 5: WAS THE OFFENDER DRINKING OR ON DRUGS? 3186-3186 V3155 6: WAS THE OFFENDER DRINKING OR ON DRUGS? 3801-3801 V3678 7: WAS THE OFFENDER DRINKING OR ON DRUGS? 4416-4416 V541 1: WHICH WAS IT? (DRINKING OR ON DRUGS?) 727-727 V1064 2: WHICH WAS IT? (DRINKING OR ON DRUGS?) 1342-1342 V1587 3: WHICH WAS IT? (DRINKING OR ON DRUGS?) 1957-1957 V2110 4: WHICH WAS IT? (DRINKING OR ON DRUGS?) 2572-2572 V2633 5: WHICH WAS IT? (DRINKING OR ON DRUGS?) 3187-3187 V3156 6: WHICH WAS IT? (DRINKING OR ON DRUGS?) 3802-3802 V3679 7: WHICH WAS IT? (DRINKING OR ON DRUGS?) 4417-4417 V542 1: OFFENDER SOMEONE YOU KNOW OR A STRANGER? 728-728 V1065 2: OFFENDER SOMEONE YOU KNOW OR A STRANGER? 1343-1343 V1588 3: OFFENDER SOMEONE YOU KNOW OR A STRANGER? 1958-1958 V2111 4: OFFENDER SOMEONE YOU KNOW OR A STRANGER? 2573-2573 V2634 5: OFFENDER SOMEONE YOU KNOW OR A STRANGER? 3188-3188 V3157 6: OFFENDER SOMEONE YOU KNOW OR A STRANGER? 3803-3803 V3680 7: OFFENDER SOMEONE YOU KNOW OR A STRANGER? 4418-4418 V543 1: WOULD YOU RECOGNIZE OFFENDER IF SEEN? 729-729 V1066 2: WOULD YOU RECOGNIZE OFFENDER IF SEEN? 1344-1344 V1589 3: WOULD YOU RECOGNIZE OFFENDER IF SEEN? 1959-1959 V2112 4: WOULD YOU RECOGNIZE OFFENDER IF SEEN? 2574-2574 V2635 5: WOULD YOU RECOGNIZE OFFENDER IF SEEN? 3189-3189 V3158 6: WOULD YOU RECOGNIZE OFFENDER IF SEEN? 3804-3804 V3681 7: WOULD YOU RECOGNIZE OFFENDER IF SEEN? 4419-4419 V544 1: HOW WELL DID YOU KNOW THE OFFENDER? 730-730 V1067 2: HOW WELL DID YOU KNOW THE OFFENDER? 1345-1345 V1590 3: HOW WELL DID YOU KNOW THE OFFENDER? 1960-1960 V2113 4: HOW WELL DID YOU KNOW THE OFFENDER? 2575-2575 V2636 5: HOW WELL DID YOU KNOW THE OFFENDER? 3190-3190 V3159 6: HOW WELL DID YOU KNOW THE OFFENDER? 3805-3805 V3682 7: HOW WELL DID YOU KNOW THE OFFENDER? 4420-4420 V545 1: WOULD YOU KNOW WHERE TO FIND OFFENDER? 731-731 V1068 2: WOULD YOU KNOW WHERE TO FIND OFFENDER? 1346-1346 V1591 3: WOULD YOU KNOW WHERE TO FIND OFFENDER? 1961-1961 V2114 4: WOULD YOU KNOW WHERE TO FIND OFFENDER? 2576-2576 V2637 5: WOULD YOU KNOW WHERE TO FIND OFFENDER? 3191-3191 V3160 6: WOULD YOU KNOW WHERE TO FIND OFFENDER? 3806-3806 V3683 7: WOULD YOU KNOW WHERE TO FIND OFFENDER? 4421-4421 V546 1: HOW DID YOU KNOW THE OFFENDER? RELATION? 732-733 V1069 2: HOW DID YOU KNOW THE OFFENDER? RELATION? 1347-1348 V1592 3: HOW DID YOU KNOW THE OFFENDER? RELATION? 1962-1963 V2115 4: HOW DID YOU KNOW THE OFFENDER? RELATION? 2577-2578 V2638 5: HOW DID YOU KNOW THE OFFENDER? RELATION? 3192-3193 V3161 6: HOW DID YOU KNOW THE OFFENDER? RELATION? 3807-3808 V3684 7: HOW DID YOU KNOW THE OFFENDER? RELATION? 4422-4423 V547 1: WAS OFFENDER WHITE, BLACK, OR OTHER RACE? 734-734 V1070 2: WAS OFFENDER WHITE, BLACK, OR OTHER RACE? 1349-1349 V1593 3: WAS OFFENDER WHITE, BLACK, OR OTHER RACE? 1964-1964 Page 59 V2116 4: WAS OFFENDER WHITE, BLACK, OR OTHER RACE? 2579-2579 V2639 5: WAS OFFENDER WHITE, BLACK, OR OTHER RACE? 3194-3194 V3162 6: WAS OFFENDER WHITE, BLACK, OR OTHER RACE? 3809-3809 V3685 7: WAS OFFENDER WHITE, BLACK, OR OTHER RACE? 4424-4424 V548 1: OFF HIST AGAINST HH. THIS THE ONLY TIME? 735-735 V1071 2: OFF HIST AGAINST HH. THIS THE ONLY TIME? 1350-1350 V1594 3: OFF HIST AGAINST HH. THIS THE ONLY TIME? 1965-1965 V2117 4: OFF HIST AGAINST HH. THIS THE ONLY TIME? 2580-2580 V2640 5: OFF HIST AGAINST HH. THIS THE ONLY TIME? 3195-3195 V3163 6: OFF HIST AGAINST HH. THIS THE ONLY TIME? 3810-3810 V3686 7: OFF HIST AGAINST HH. THIS THE ONLY TIME? 4425-4425 V549 1: (MULT)HOW MANY OFFENDERS? 736-737 V1072 2: (MULT)HOW MANY OFFENDERS? 1351-1352 V1595 3: (MULT)HOW MANY OFFENDERS? 1966-1967 V2118 4: (MULT)HOW MANY OFFENDERS? 2581-2582 V2641 5: (MULT)HOW MANY OFFENDERS? 3196-3197 V3164 6: (MULT)HOW MANY OFFENDERS? 3811-3812 V3687 7: (MULT)HOW MANY OFFENDERS? 4426-4427 V550 1: (MULT)WERE THEY MALE OR FEMALE? 738-738 V1073 2: (MULT)WERE THEY MALE OR FEMALE? 1353-1353 V1596 3: (MULT)WERE THEY MALE OR FEMALE? 1968-1968 V2119 4: (MULT)WERE THEY MALE OR FEMALE? 2583-2583 V2642 5: (MULT)WERE THEY MALE OR FEMALE? 3198-3198 V3165 6: (MULT)WERE THEY MALE OR FEMALE? 3813-3813 V3688 7: (MULT)WERE THEY MALE OR FEMALE? 4428-4428 V551 1: (MULT)MOSTLY MALE OR MOSTLY FEMALE? 739-739 V1074 2: (MULT)MOSTLY MALE OR MOSTLY FEMALE? 1354-1354 V1597 3: (MULT)MOSTLY MALE OR MOSTLY FEMALE? 1969-1969 V2120 4: (MULT)MOSTLY MALE OR MOSTLY FEMALE? 2584-2584 V2643 5: (MULT)MOSTLY MALE OR MOSTLY FEMALE? 3199-3199 V3166 6: (MULT)MOSTLY MALE OR MOSTLY FEMALE? 3814-3814 V3689 7: (MULT)MOSTLY MALE OR MOSTLY FEMALE? 4429-4429 V552 1: (MULT)ESTIMATED AGE OF THE YOUNGEST 740-740 V1075 2: (MULT)ESTIMATED AGE OF THE YOUNGEST 1355-1355 V1598 3: (MULT)ESTIMATED AGE OF THE YOUNGEST 1970-1970 V2121 4: (MULT)ESTIMATED AGE OF THE YOUNGEST 2585-2585 V2644 5: (MULT)ESTIMATED AGE OF THE YOUNGEST 3200-3200 V3167 6: (MULT)ESTIMATED AGE OF THE YOUNGEST 3815-3815 V3690 7: (MULT)ESTIMATED AGE OF THE YOUNGEST 4430-4430 V553 1: (MULT)ESTIMATED AGE OF THE OLDEST 741-741 V1076 2: (MULT)ESTIMATED AGE OF THE OLDEST 1356-1356 V1599 3: (MULT)ESTIMATED AGE OF THE OLDEST 1971-1971 V2122 4: (MULT)ESTIMATED AGE OF THE OLDEST 2586-2586 V2645 5: (MULT)ESTIMATED AGE OF THE OLDEST 3201-3201 V3168 6: (MULT)ESTIMATED AGE OF THE OLDEST 3816-3816 V3691 7: (MULT)ESTIMATED AGE OF THE OLDEST 4431-4431 V554 1: (MULT)ANY OFFENDERS STREET GANG MEMBERS? 742-742 V1077 2: (MULT)ANY OFFENDERS STREET GANG MEMBERS? 1357-1357 V1600 3: (MULT)ANY OFFENDERS STREET GANG MEMBERS? 1972-1972 V2123 4: (MULT)ANY OFFENDERS STREET GANG MEMBERS? 2587-2587 V2646 5: (MULT)ANY OFFENDERS STREET GANG MEMBERS? 3202-3202 V3169 6: (MULT)ANY OFFENDERS STREET GANG MEMBERS? 3817-3817 V3692 7: (MULT)ANY OFFENDERS STREET GANG MEMBERS? 4432-4432 Page 60 V555 1: (MULT)ANY OFFENDERS DRINKING OR ON DRUGS? 743-743 V1078 2: (MULT)ANY OFFENDERS DRINKING OR ON DRUGS? 1358-1358 V1601 3: (MULT)ANY OFFENDERS DRINKING OR ON DRUGS? 1973-1973 V2124 4: (MULT)ANY OFFENDERS DRINKING OR ON DRUGS? 2588-2588 V2647 5: (MULT)ANY OFFENDERS DRINKING OR ON DRUGS? 3203-3203 V3170 6: (MULT)ANY OFFENDERS DRINKING OR ON DRUGS? 3818-3818 V3693 7: (MULT)ANY OFFENDERS DRINKING OR ON DRUGS? 4433-4433 V556 1: (MULT)WHICH? (DRINKING OR ON DRUGS?) 744-744 V1079 2: (MULT)WHICH? (DRINKING OR ON DRUGS?) 1359-1359 V1602 3: (MULT)WHICH? (DRINKING OR ON DRUGS?) 1974-1974 V2125 4: (MULT)WHICH? (DRINKING OR ON DRUGS?) 2589-2589 V2648 5: (MULT)WHICH? (DRINKING OR ON DRUGS?) 3204-3204 V3171 6: (MULT)WHICH? (DRINKING OR ON DRUGS?) 3819-3819 V3694 7: (MULT)WHICH? (DRINKING OR ON DRUGS?) 4434-4434 V557 1: (MULT)ANY OFFENDERS KNOWN TO YOU? 745-745 V1080 2: (MULT)ANY OFFENDERS KNOWN TO YOU? 1360-1360 V1603 3: (MULT)ANY OFFENDERS KNOWN TO YOU? 1975-1975 V2126 4: (MULT)ANY OFFENDERS KNOWN TO YOU? 2590-2590 V2649 5: (MULT)ANY OFFENDERS KNOWN TO YOU? 3205-3205 V3172 6: (MULT)ANY OFFENDERS KNOWN TO YOU? 3820-3820 V3695 7: (MULT)ANY OFFENDERS KNOWN TO YOU? 4435-4435 V558 1: (MULT)WOULD YOU RECOGNIZE ANY IF SEEN? 746-746 V1081 2: (MULT)WOULD YOU RECOGNIZE ANY IF SEEN? 1361-1361 V1604 3: (MULT)WOULD YOU RECOGNIZE ANY IF SEEN? 1976-1976 V2127 4: (MULT)WOULD YOU RECOGNIZE ANY IF SEEN? 2591-2591 V2650 5: (MULT)WOULD YOU RECOGNIZE ANY IF SEEN? 3206-3206 V3173 6: (MULT)WOULD YOU RECOGNIZE ANY IF SEEN? 3821-3821 V3696 7: (MULT)WOULD YOU RECOGNIZE ANY IF SEEN? 4436-4436 V559 1: LI (MULT)HOW WELL YOU KNOW OFFENDER(S)? 747-747 V1082 2: LI (MULT)HOW WELL YOU KNOW OFFENDER(S)? 1362-1362 V1605 3: LI (MULT)HOW WELL YOU KNOW OFFENDER(S)? 1977-1977 V2128 4: LI (MULT)HOW WELL YOU KNOW OFFENDER(S)? 2592-2592 V2651 5: LI (MULT)HOW WELL YOU KNOW OFFENDER(S)? 3207-3207 V3174 6: LI (MULT)HOW WELL YOU KNOW OFFENDER(S)? 3822-3822 V3697 7: LI (MULT)HOW WELL YOU KNOW OFFENDER(S)? 4437-4437 V560 1: C SIGHT ONLY 748-748 V1083 2: C SIGHT ONLY 1363-1363 V1606 3: C SIGHT ONLY 1978-1978 V2129 4: C SIGHT ONLY 2593-2593 V2652 5: C SIGHT ONLY 3208-3208 V3175 6: C SIGHT ONLY 3823-3823 V3698 7: C SIGHT ONLY 4438-4438 V561 1: C CASUAL ACQUAINTANCE 749-749 V1084 2: C CASUAL ACQUAINTANCE 1364-1364 V1607 3: C CASUAL ACQUAINTANCE 1979-1979 V2130 4: C CASUAL ACQUAINTANCE 2594-2594 V2653 5: C CASUAL ACQUAINTANCE 3209-3209 V3176 6: C CASUAL ACQUAINTANCE 3824-3824 V3699 7: C CASUAL ACQUAINTANCE 4439-4439 V562 1: C WELL KNOWN 750-750 V1085 2: C WELL KNOWN 1365-1365 V1608 3: C WELL KNOWN 1980-1980 V2131 4: C WELL KNOWN 2595-2595 V2654 5: C WELL KNOWN 3210-3210 Page 61 V3177 6: C WELL KNOWN 3825-3825 V3700 7: C WELL KNOWN 4440-4440 V563 1: RESIDUE (MULT)HOW WELL KNOW OFFENDER(S) 751-751 V1086 2: RESIDUE (MULT)HOW WELL KNOW OFFENDER(S) 1366-1366 V1609 3: RESIDUE (MULT)HOW WELL KNOW OFFENDER(S) 1981-1981 V2132 4: RESIDUE (MULT)HOW WELL KNOW OFFENDER(S) 2596-2596 V2655 5: RESIDUE (MULT)HOW WELL KNOW OFFENDER(S) 3211-3211 V3178 6: RESIDUE (MULT)HOW WELL KNOW OFFENDER(S) 3826-3826 V3701 7: RESIDUE (MULT)HOW WELL KNOW OFFENDER(S) 4441-4441 V564 1: (MULT)YOU KNOW WHERE TO FIND OFFENDER(S)? 752-752 V1087 2: (MULT)YOU KNOW WHERE TO FIND OFFENDER(S)? 1367-1367 V1610 3: (MULT)YOU KNOW WHERE TO FIND OFFENDER(S)? 1982-1982 V2133 4: (MULT)YOU KNOW WHERE TO FIND OFFENDER(S)? 2597-2597 V2656 5: (MULT)YOU KNOW WHERE TO FIND OFFENDER(S)? 3212-3212 V3179 6: (MULT)YOU KNOW WHERE TO FIND OFFENDER(S)? 3827-3827 V3702 7: (MULT)YOU KNOW WHERE TO FIND OFFENDER(S)? 4442-4442 V565 1: LI (MULT)HOW DID YOU KNOW THEM? RELATION? 753-753 V1088 2: LI (MULT)HOW DID YOU KNOW THEM? RELATION? 1368-1368 V1611 3: LI (MULT)HOW DID YOU KNOW THEM? RELATION? 1983-1983 V2134 4: LI (MULT)HOW DID YOU KNOW THEM? RELATION? 2598-2598 V2657 5: LI (MULT)HOW DID YOU KNOW THEM? RELATION? 3213-3213 V3180 6: LI (MULT)HOW DID YOU KNOW THEM? RELATION? 3828-3828 V3703 7: LI (MULT)HOW DID YOU KNOW THEM? RELATION? 4443-4443 V566 1: C SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 754-754 V1089 2: C SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 1369-1369 V1612 3: C SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 1984-1984 V2135 4: C SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 2599-2599 V2658 5: C SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 3214-3214 V3181 6: C SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 3829-3829 V3704 7: C SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 4444-4444 V567 1: C EX-SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 755-755 V1090 2: C EX-SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 1370-1370 V1613 3: C EX-SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 1985-1985 V2136 4: C EX-SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 2600-2600 V2659 5: C EX-SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 3215-3215 V3182 6: C EX-SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 3830-3830 V3705 7: C EX-SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 4445-4445 V568 1: C PARENT OR STEP-PARENT 756-756 V1091 2: C PARENT OR STEP-PARENT 1371-1371 V1614 3: C PARENT OR STEP-PARENT 1986-1986 V2137 4: C PARENT OR STEP-PARENT 2601-2601 V2660 5: C PARENT OR STEP-PARENT 3216-3216 V3183 6: C PARENT OR STEP-PARENT 3831-3831 V3706 7: C PARENT OR STEP-PARENT 4446-4446 V569 1: C OWN CHILD OR STEP-CHILD 757-757 V1092 2: C OWN CHILD OR STEP-CHILD 1372-1372 V1615 3: C OWN CHILD OR STEP-CHILD 1987-1987 V2138 4: C OWN CHILD OR STEP-CHILD 2602-2602 V2661 5: C OWN CHILD OR STEP-CHILD 3217-3217 V3184 6: C OWN CHILD OR STEP-CHILD 3832-3832 V3707 7: C OWN CHILD OR STEP-CHILD 4447-4447 V570 1: C BROTHER/SISTER 758-758 V1093 2: C BROTHER/SISTER 1373-1373 V1616 3: C BROTHER/SISTER 1988-1988 Page 62 V2139 4: C BROTHER/SISTER 2603-2603 V2662 5: C BROTHER/SISTER 3218-3218 V3185 6: C BROTHER/SISTER 3833-3833 V3708 7: C BROTHER/SISTER 4448-4448 V571 1: C OTHER RELATIVE 759-759 V1094 2: C OTHER RELATIVE 1374-1374 V1617 3: C OTHER RELATIVE 1989-1989 V2140 4: C OTHER RELATIVE 2604-2604 V2663 5: C OTHER RELATIVE 3219-3219 V3186 6: C OTHER RELATIVE 3834-3834 V3709 7: C OTHER RELATIVE 4449-4449 V572 1: C BOYFRIEND, GIRLFRIEND, EX? 760-760 V1095 2: C BOYFRIEND, GIRLFRIEND, EX? 1375-1375 V1618 3: C BOYFRIEND, GIRLFRIEND, EX? 1990-1990 V2141 4: C BOYFRIEND, GIRLFRIEND, EX? 2605-2605 V2664 5: C BOYFRIEND, GIRLFRIEND, EX? 3220-3220 V3187 6: C BOYFRIEND, GIRLFRIEND, EX? 3835-3835 V3710 7: C BOYFRIEND, GIRLFRIEND, EX? 4450-4450 V573 1: C FRIEND OR EX-FRIEND 761-761 V1096 2: C FRIEND OR EX-FRIEND 1376-1376 V1619 3: C FRIEND OR EX-FRIEND 1991-1991 V2142 4: C FRIEND OR EX-FRIEND 2606-2606 V2665 5: C FRIEND OR EX-FRIEND 3221-3221 V3188 6: C FRIEND OR EX-FRIEND 3836-3836 V3711 7: C FRIEND OR EX-FRIEND 4451-4451 V574 1: C ROOMMATE, BOARDER 762-762 V1097 2: C ROOMMATE, BOARDER 1377-1377 V1620 3: C ROOMMATE, BOARDER 1992-1992 V2143 4: C ROOMMATE, BOARDER 2607-2607 V2666 5: C ROOMMATE, BOARDER 3222-3222 V3189 6: C ROOMMATE, BOARDER 3837-3837 V3712 7: C ROOMMATE, BOARDER 4452-4452 V575 1: C SCHOOLMATE 763-763 V1098 2: C SCHOOLMATE 1378-1378 V1621 3: C SCHOOLMATE 1993-1993 V2144 4: C SCHOOLMATE 2608-2608 V2667 5: C SCHOOLMATE 3223-3223 V3190 6: C SCHOOLMATE 3838-3838 V3713 7: C SCHOOLMATE 4453-4453 V576 1: C NEIGHBOR 764-764 V1099 2: C NEIGHBOR 1379-1379 V1622 3: C NEIGHBOR 1994-1994 V2145 4: C NEIGHBOR 2609-2609 V2668 5: C NEIGHBOR 3224-3224 V3191 6: C NEIGHBOR 3839-3839 V3714 7: C NEIGHBOR 4454-4454 V577 1: C SOMEONE AT WORK, CUSTOMER 765-765 V1100 2: C SOMEONE AT WORK, CUSTOMER 1380-1380 V1623 3: C SOMEONE AT WORK, CUSTOMER 1995-1995 V2146 4: C SOMEONE AT WORK, CUSTOMER 2610-2610 V2669 5: C SOMEONE AT WORK, CUSTOMER 3225-3225 V3192 6: C SOMEONE AT WORK, CUSTOMER 3840-3840 V3715 7: C SOMEONE AT WORK, CUSTOMER 4455-4455 Page 63 V578 1: C OTHER NONRELATIVE 766-766 V1101 2: C OTHER NONRELATIVE 1381-1381 V1624 3: C OTHER NONRELATIVE 1996-1996 V2147 4: C OTHER NONRELATIVE 2611-2611 V2670 5: C OTHER NONRELATIVE 3226-3226 V3193 6: C OTHER NONRELATIVE 3841-3841 V3716 7: C OTHER NONRELATIVE 4456-4456 V579 1: RESIDUE (MULT)HOW DID YOU KNOW THEM? 767-767 V1102 2: RESIDUE (MULT)HOW DID YOU KNOW THEM? 1382-1382 V1625 3: RESIDUE (MULT)HOW DID YOU KNOW THEM? 1997-1997 V2148 4: RESIDUE (MULT)HOW DID YOU KNOW THEM? 2612-2612 V2671 5: RESIDUE (MULT)HOW DID YOU KNOW THEM? 3227-3227 V3194 6: RESIDUE (MULT)HOW DID YOU KNOW THEM? 3842-3842 V3717 7: RESIDUE (MULT)HOW DID YOU KNOW THEM? 4457-4457 V580 1: LI (MULT)WHITE, BLACK, SOME OTHER RACE? 768-768 V1103 2: LI (MULT)WHITE, BLACK, SOME OTHER RACE? 1383-1383 V1626 3: LI (MULT)WHITE, BLACK, SOME OTHER RACE? 1998-1998 V2149 4: LI (MULT)WHITE, BLACK, SOME OTHER RACE? 2613-2613 V2672 5: LI (MULT)WHITE, BLACK, SOME OTHER RACE? 3228-3228 V3195 6: LI (MULT)WHITE, BLACK, SOME OTHER RACE? 3843-3843 V3718 7: LI (MULT)WHITE, BLACK, SOME OTHER RACE? 4458-4458 V581 1: C WHITE 769-769 V1104 2: C WHITE 1384-1384 V1627 3: C WHITE 1999-1999 V2150 4: C WHITE 2614-2614 V2673 5: C WHITE 3229-3229 V3196 6: C WHITE 3844-3844 V3719 7: C WHITE 4459-4459 V582 1: C BLACK 770-770 V1105 2: C BLACK 1385-1385 V1628 3: C BLACK 2000-2000 V2151 4: C BLACK 2615-2615 V2674 5: C BLACK 3230-3230 V3197 6: C BLACK 3845-3845 V3720 7: C BLACK 4460-4460 V583 1: C OTHER 771-771 V1106 2: C OTHER 1386-1386 V1629 3: C OTHER 2001-2001 V2152 4: C OTHER 2616-2616 V2675 5: C OTHER 3231-3231 V3198 6: C OTHER 3846-3846 V3721 7: C OTHER 4461-4461 V584 1: C DON'T KNOW RACE OF ANY/SOME 772-772 V1107 2: C DON'T KNOW RACE OF ANY/SOME 1387-1387 V1630 3: C DON'T KNOW RACE OF ANY/SOME 2002-2002 V2153 4: C DON'T KNOW RACE OF ANY/SOME 2617-2617 V2676 5: C DON'T KNOW RACE OF ANY/SOME 3232-3232 V3199 6: C DON'T KNOW RACE OF ANY/SOME 3847-3847 V3722 7: C DON'T KNOW RACE OF ANY/SOME 4462-4462 V585 1: RESIDUE (MULT)WHITE, BLACK, OTHER? 773-773 V1108 2: RESIDUE (MULT)WHITE, BLACK, OTHER? 1388-1388 V1631 3: RESIDUE (MULT)WHITE, BLACK, OTHER? 2003-2003 V2154 4: RESIDUE (MULT)WHITE, BLACK, OTHER? 2618-2618 V2677 5: RESIDUE (MULT)WHITE, BLACK, OTHER? 3233-3233 Page 64 V3200 6: RESIDUE (MULT)WHITE, BLACK, OTHER? 3848-3848 V3723 7: RESIDUE (MULT)WHITE, BLACK, OTHER? 4463-4463 V586 1: (MULT)WHAT RACE WERE MOST OF OFFENDERS? 774-774 V1109 2: (MULT)WHAT RACE WERE MOST OF OFFENDERS? 1389-1389 V1632 3: (MULT)WHAT RACE WERE MOST OF OFFENDERS? 2004-2004 V2155 4: (MULT)WHAT RACE WERE MOST OF OFFENDERS? 2619-2619 V2678 5: (MULT)WHAT RACE WERE MOST OF OFFENDERS? 3234-3234 V3201 6: (MULT)WHAT RACE WERE MOST OF OFFENDERS? 3849-3849 V3724 7: (MULT)WHAT RACE WERE MOST OF OFFENDERS? 4464-4464 V587 1: (MULT)OFF HISTORY AGAINST HH. ONLY TIME? 775-775 V1110 2: (MULT)OFF HISTORY AGAINST HH. ONLY TIME? 1390-1390 V1633 3: (MULT)OFF HISTORY AGAINST HH. ONLY TIME? 2005-2005 V2156 4: (MULT)OFF HISTORY AGAINST HH. ONLY TIME? 2620-2620 V2679 5: (MULT)OFF HISTORY AGAINST HH. ONLY TIME? 3235-3235 V3202 6: (MULT)OFF HISTORY AGAINST HH. ONLY TIME? 3850-3850 V3725 7: (MULT)OFF HISTORY AGAINST HH. ONLY TIME? 4465-4465 V588 1: PROPERTY OF YOU/HH MEM STOLEN?(ORIGINAL) 776-776 V1111 2: PROPERTY OF YOU/HH MEM STOLEN?(ORIGINAL) 1391-1391 V1634 3: PROPERTY OF YOU/HH MEM STOLEN?(ORIGINAL) 2006-2006 V2157 4: PROPERTY OF YOU/HH MEM STOLEN?(ORIGINAL) 2621-2621 V2680 5: PROPERTY OF YOU/HH MEM STOLEN?(ORIGINAL) 3236-3236 V3203 6: PROPERTY OF YOU/HH MEM STOLEN?(ORIGINAL) 3851-3851 V3726 7: PROPERTY OF YOU/HH MEM STOLEN?(ORIGINAL) 4466-4466 V589 1: PROPERTY OF YOU/HH MEM STOLEN?(ALLOCATED) 777-777 V1112 2: PROPERTY OF YOU/HH MEM STOLEN?(ALLOCATED) 1392-1392 V1635 3: PROPERTY OF YOU/HH MEM STOLEN?(ALLOCATED) 2007-2007 V2158 4: PROPERTY OF YOU/HH MEM STOLEN?(ALLOCATED) 2622-2622 V2681 5: PROPERTY OF YOU/HH MEM STOLEN?(ALLOCATED) 3237-3237 V3204 6: PROPERTY OF YOU/HH MEM STOLEN?(ALLOCATED) 3852-3852 V3727 7: PROPERTY OF YOU/HH MEM STOLEN?(ALLOCATED) 4467-4467 V590 1: ATTEMPTED PROPERTY THEFT? (ORIGINAL) 778-778 V1113 2: ATTEMPTED PROPERTY THEFT? (ORIGINAL) 1393-1393 V1636 3: ATTEMPTED PROPERTY THEFT? (ORIGINAL) 2008-2008 V2159 4: ATTEMPTED PROPERTY THEFT? (ORIGINAL) 2623-2623 V2682 5: ATTEMPTED PROPERTY THEFT? (ORIGINAL) 3238-3238 V3205 6: ATTEMPTED PROPERTY THEFT? (ORIGINAL) 3853-3853 V3728 7: ATTEMPTED PROPERTY THEFT? (ORIGINAL) 4468-4468 V591 1: ATTEMPTED PROPERTY THEFT? (ALLOCATED) 779-779 V1114 2: ATTEMPTED PROPERTY THEFT? (ALLOCATED) 1394-1394 V1637 3: ATTEMPTED PROPERTY THEFT? (ALLOCATED) 2009-2009 V2160 4: ATTEMPTED PROPERTY THEFT? (ALLOCATED) 2624-2624 V2683 5: ATTEMPTED PROPERTY THEFT? (ALLOCATED) 3239-3239 V3206 6: ATTEMPTED PROPERTY THEFT? (ALLOCATED) 3854-3854 V3729 7: ATTEMPTED PROPERTY THEFT? (ALLOCATED) 4469-4469 V592 1: LI WHAT DID THE OFFENDER TRY TO TAKE? 780-780 V1115 2: LI WHAT DID THE OFFENDER TRY TO TAKE? 1395-1395 V1638 3: LI WHAT DID THE OFFENDER TRY TO TAKE? 2010-2010 V2161 4: LI WHAT DID THE OFFENDER TRY TO TAKE? 2625-2625 V2684 5: LI WHAT DID THE OFFENDER TRY TO TAKE? 3240-3240 V3207 6: LI WHAT DID THE OFFENDER TRY TO TAKE? 3855-3855 V3730 7: LI WHAT DID THE OFFENDER TRY TO TAKE? 4470-4470 V593 1: C CASH 781-781 V1116 2: C CASH 1396-1396 V1639 3: C CASH 2011-2011 Page 65 V2162 4: C CASH 2626-2626 V2685 5: C CASH 3241-3241 V3208 6: C CASH 3856-3856 V3731 7: C CASH 4471-4471 V594 1: C PURSE 782-782 V1117 2: C PURSE 1397-1397 V1640 3: C PURSE 2012-2012 V2163 4: C PURSE 2627-2627 V2686 5: C PURSE 3242-3242 V3209 6: C PURSE 3857-3857 V3732 7: C PURSE 4472-4472 V595 1: C WALLET 783-783 V1118 2: C WALLET 1398-1398 V1641 3: C WALLET 2013-2013 V2164 4: C WALLET 2628-2628 V2687 5: C WALLET 3243-3243 V3210 6: C WALLET 3858-3858 V3733 7: C WALLET 4473-4473 V596 1: C CREDIT CARDS, CHECKS, BANK CARDS 784-784 V1119 2: C CREDIT CARDS, CHECKS, BANK CARDS 1399-1399 V1642 3: C CREDIT CARDS, CHECKS, BANK CARDS 2014-2014 V2165 4: C CREDIT CARDS, CHECKS, BANK CARDS 2629-2629 V2688 5: C CREDIT CARDS, CHECKS, BANK CARDS 3244-3244 V3211 6: C CREDIT CARDS, CHECKS, BANK CARDS 3859-3859 V3734 7: C CREDIT CARDS, CHECKS, BANK CARDS 4474-4474 V597 1: C CAR 785-785 V1120 2: C CAR 1400-1400 V1643 3: C CAR 2015-2015 V2166 4: C CAR 2630-2630 V2689 5: C CAR 3245-3245 V3212 6: C CAR 3860-3860 V3735 7: C CAR 4475-4475 V598 1: C OTHER MOTOR VEHICLE 786-786 V1121 2: C OTHER MOTOR VEHICLE 1401-1401 V1644 3: C OTHER MOTOR VEHICLE 2016-2016 V2167 4: C OTHER MOTOR VEHICLE 2631-2631 V2690 5: C OTHER MOTOR VEHICLE 3246-3246 V3213 6: C OTHER MOTOR VEHICLE 3861-3861 V3736 7: C OTHER MOTOR VEHICLE 4476-4476 V599 1: C PART OF MOTOR VEHICLE (ATTACHED) 787-787 V1122 2: C PART OF MOTOR VEHICLE (ATTACHED) 1402-1402 V1645 3: C PART OF MOTOR VEHICLE (ATTACHED) 2017-2017 V2168 4: C PART OF MOTOR VEHICLE (ATTACHED) 2632-2632 V2691 5: C PART OF MOTOR VEHICLE (ATTACHED) 3247-3247 V3214 6: C PART OF MOTOR VEHICLE (ATTACHED) 3862-3862 V3737 7: C PART OF MOTOR VEHICLE (ATTACHED) 4477-4477 V600 1: C GASOLINE OR OIL 788-788 V1123 2: C GASOLINE OR OIL 1403-1403 V1646 3: C GASOLINE OR OIL 2018-2018 V2169 4: C GASOLINE OR OIL 2633-2633 V2692 5: C GASOLINE OR OIL 3248-3248 V3215 6: C GASOLINE OR OIL 3863-3863 V3738 7: C GASOLINE OR OIL 4478-4478 Page 66 V601 1: C BICYCLE OR PARTS 789-789 V1124 2: C BICYCLE OR PARTS 1404-1404 V1647 3: C BICYCLE OR PARTS 2019-2019 V2170 4: C BICYCLE OR PARTS 2634-2634 V2693 5: C BICYCLE OR PARTS 3249-3249 V3216 6: C BICYCLE OR PARTS 3864-3864 V3739 7: C BICYCLE OR PARTS 4479-4479 V602 1: C TV, STEREO, OTHER HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCES 790-790 V1125 2: C TV, STEREO, OTHER HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCES 1405-1405 V1648 3: C TV, STEREO, OTHER HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCES 2020-2020 V2171 4: C TV, STEREO, OTHER HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCES 2635-2635 V2694 5: C TV, STEREO, OTHER HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCES 3250-3250 V3217 6: C TV, STEREO, OTHER HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCES 3865-3865 V3740 7: C TV, STEREO, OTHER HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCES 4480-4480 V603 1: C SILVER, CHINA, ART OBJECTS 791-791 V1126 2: C SILVER, CHINA, ART OBJECTS 1406-1406 V1649 3: C SILVER, CHINA, ART OBJECTS 2021-2021 V2172 4: C SILVER, CHINA, ART OBJECTS 2636-2636 V2695 5: C SILVER, CHINA, ART OBJECTS 3251-3251 V3218 6: C SILVER, CHINA, ART OBJECTS 3866-3866 V3741 7: C SILVER, CHINA, ART OBJECTS 4481-4481 V604 1: C OTHER HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS 792-792 V1127 2: C OTHER HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS 1407-1407 V1650 3: C OTHER HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS 2022-2022 V2173 4: C OTHER HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS 2637-2637 V2696 5: C OTHER HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS 3252-3252 V3219 6: C OTHER HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS 3867-3867 V3742 7: C OTHER HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS 4482-4482 V605 1: C PERSONAL EFFECTS (CLOTHING,JEWELRY,ETC) 793-793 V1128 2: C PERSONAL EFFECTS (CLOTHING,JEWELRY,ETC) 1408-1408 V1651 3: C PERSONAL EFFECTS (CLOTHING,JEWELRY,ETC) 2023-2023 V2174 4: C PERSONAL EFFECTS (CLOTHING,JEWELRY,ETC) 2638-2638 V2697 5: C PERSONAL EFFECTS (CLOTHING,JEWELRY,ETC) 3253-3253 V3220 6: C PERSONAL EFFECTS (CLOTHING,JEWELRY,ETC) 3868-3868 V3743 7: C PERSONAL EFFECTS (CLOTHING,JEWELRY,ETC) 4483-4483 V606 1: C HANDGUN (PISTOL, REVOLVER) 794-794 V1129 2: C HANDGUN (PISTOL, REVOLVER) 1409-1409 V1652 3: C HANDGUN (PISTOL, REVOLVER) 2024-2024 V2175 4: C HANDGUN (PISTOL, REVOLVER) 2639-2639 V2698 5: C HANDGUN (PISTOL, REVOLVER) 3254-3254 V3221 6: C HANDGUN (PISTOL, REVOLVER) 3869-3869 V3744 7: C HANDGUN (PISTOL, REVOLVER) 4484-4484 V607 1: C OTHER FIREARM (RIFLE, SHOTGUN) 795-795 V1130 2: C OTHER FIREARM (RIFLE, SHOTGUN) 1410-1410 V1653 3: C OTHER FIREARM (RIFLE, SHOTGUN) 2025-2025 V2176 4: C OTHER FIREARM (RIFLE, SHOTGUN) 2640-2640 V2699 5: C OTHER FIREARM (RIFLE, SHOTGUN) 3255-3255 V3222 6: C OTHER FIREARM (RIFLE, SHOTGUN) 3870-3870 V3745 7: C OTHER FIREARM (RIFLE, SHOTGUN) 4485-4485 V608 1: C OTHER 796-796 V1131 2: C OTHER 1411-1411 V1654 3: C OTHER 2026-2026 V2177 4: C OTHER 2641-2641 V2700 5: C OTHER 3256-3256 Page 67 V3223 6: C OTHER 3871-3871 V3746 7: C OTHER 4486-4486 V609 1: C DON'T KNOW 797-797 V1132 2: C DON'T KNOW 1412-1412 V1655 3: C DON'T KNOW 2027-2027 V2178 4: C DON'T KNOW 2642-2642 V2701 5: C DON'T KNOW 3257-3257 V3224 6: C DON'T KNOW 3872-3872 V3747 7: C DON'T KNOW 4487-4487 V610 1: RESIDUE WHAT DID OFFENDER TRY TO TAKE? 798-798 V1133 2: RESIDUE WHAT DID OFFENDER TRY TO TAKE? 1413-1413 V1656 3: RESIDUE WHAT DID OFFENDER TRY TO TAKE? 2028-2028 V2179 4: RESIDUE WHAT DID OFFENDER TRY TO TAKE? 2643-2643 V2702 5: RESIDUE WHAT DID OFFENDER TRY TO TAKE? 3258-3258 V3225 6: RESIDUE WHAT DID OFFENDER TRY TO TAKE? 3873-3873 V3748 7: RESIDUE WHAT DID OFFENDER TRY TO TAKE? 4488-4488 V611 1: OWNER OF THE PROPERTY OF ATTEMPT THEFT 799-799 V1134 2: OWNER OF THE PROPERTY OF ATTEMPT THEFT 1414-1414 V1657 3: OWNER OF THE PROPERTY OF ATTEMPT THEFT 2029-2029 V2180 4: OWNER OF THE PROPERTY OF ATTEMPT THEFT 2644-2644 V2703 5: OWNER OF THE PROPERTY OF ATTEMPT THEFT 3259-3259 V3226 6: OWNER OF THE PROPERTY OF ATTEMPT THEFT 3874-3874 V3749 7: OWNER OF THE PROPERTY OF ATTEMPT THEFT 4489-4489 V612 1: FIRST HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 800-801 V1135 2: FIRST HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 1415-1416 V1658 3: FIRST HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 2030-2031 V2181 4: FIRST HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 2645-2646 V2704 5: FIRST HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 3260-3261 V3227 6: FIRST HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 3875-3876 V3750 7: FIRST HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 4490-4491 V613 1: SECOND HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 802-803 V1136 2: SECOND HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 1417-1418 V1659 3: SECOND HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 2032-2033 V2182 4: SECOND HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 2647-2648 V2705 5: SECOND HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 3262-3263 V3228 6: SECOND HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 3877-3878 V3751 7: SECOND HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 4492-4493 V614 1: THIRD HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 804-805 V1137 2: THIRD HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 1419-1420 V1660 3: THIRD HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 2034-2035 V2183 4: THIRD HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 2649-2650 V2706 5: THIRD HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 3264-3265 V3229 6: THIRD HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 3879-3880 V3752 7: THIRD HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 4494-4495 V615 1: ARTICLE IN/ATTACHED TO MV DURING ATTEMPT? 806-806 V1138 2: ARTICLE IN/ATTACHED TO MV DURING ATTEMPT? 1421-1421 V1661 3: ARTICLE IN/ATTACHED TO MV DURING ATTEMPT? 2036-2036 V2184 4: ARTICLE IN/ATTACHED TO MV DURING ATTEMPT? 2651-2651 V2707 5: ARTICLE IN/ATTACHED TO MV DURING ATTEMPT? 3266-3266 V3230 6: ARTICLE IN/ATTACHED TO MV DURING ATTEMPT? 3881-3881 V3753 7: ARTICLE IN/ATTACHED TO MV DURING ATTEMPT? 4496-4496 V616 1: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ORIGINAL) 807-807 V1139 2: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ORIGINAL) 1422-1422 V1662 3: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ORIGINAL) 2037-2037 Page 68 V2185 4: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ORIGINAL) 2652-2652 V2708 5: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ORIGINAL) 3267-3267 V3231 6: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ORIGINAL) 3882-3882 V3754 7: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ORIGINAL) 4497-4497 V617 1: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ALLOCATED) 808-808 V1140 2: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ALLOCATED) 1423-1423 V1663 3: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ALLOCATED) 2038-2038 V2186 4: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ALLOCATED) 2653-2653 V2709 5: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ALLOCATED) 3268-3268 V3232 6: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ALLOCATED) 3883-3883 V3755 7: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ALLOCATED) 4498-4498 V618 1: TRY TAKE ANYTHG(ELSE)DIRECT FROM YOU? 809-809 V1141 2: TRY TAKE ANYTHG(ELSE)DIRECT FROM YOU? 1424-1424 V1664 3: TRY TAKE ANYTHG(ELSE)DIRECT FROM YOU? 2039-2039 V2187 4: TRY TAKE ANYTHG(ELSE)DIRECT FROM YOU? 2654-2654 V2710 5: TRY TAKE ANYTHG(ELSE)DIRECT FROM YOU? 3269-3269 V3233 6: TRY TAKE ANYTHG(ELSE)DIRECT FROM YOU? 3884-3884 V3756 7: TRY TAKE ANYTHG(ELSE)DIRECT FROM YOU? 4499-4499 V619 1: FIRST ITEM TRIED TO TAKE 810-811 V1142 2: FIRST ITEM TRIED TO TAKE 1425-1426 V1665 3: FIRST ITEM TRIED TO TAKE 2040-2041 V2188 4: FIRST ITEM TRIED TO TAKE 2655-2656 V2711 5: FIRST ITEM TRIED TO TAKE 3270-3271 V3234 6: FIRST ITEM TRIED TO TAKE 3885-3886 V3757 7: FIRST ITEM TRIED TO TAKE 4500-4501 V620 1: SECOND ITEM TRIED TO TAKE 812-813 V1143 2: SECOND ITEM TRIED TO TAKE 1427-1428 V1666 3: SECOND ITEM TRIED TO TAKE 2042-2043 V2189 4: SECOND ITEM TRIED TO TAKE 2657-2658 V2712 5: SECOND ITEM TRIED TO TAKE 3272-3273 V3235 6: SECOND ITEM TRIED TO TAKE 3887-3888 V3758 7: SECOND ITEM TRIED TO TAKE 4502-4503 V621 1: THIRD ITEM TRIED TO TAKE 814-815 V1144 2: THIRD ITEM TRIED TO TAKE 1429-1430 V1667 3: THIRD ITEM TRIED TO TAKE 2044-2045 V2190 4: THIRD ITEM TRIED TO TAKE 2659-2660 V2713 5: THIRD ITEM TRIED TO TAKE 3274-3275 V3236 6: THIRD ITEM TRIED TO TAKE 3889-3890 V3759 7: THIRD ITEM TRIED TO TAKE 4504-4505 V622 1: AMNT CASH TAKEN FROM YOU/OTHER HH MEMBER 816-820 V1145 2: AMNT CASH TAKEN FROM YOU/OTHER HH MEMBER 1431-1435 V1668 3: AMNT CASH TAKEN FROM YOU/OTHER HH MEMBER 2046-2050 V2191 4: AMNT CASH TAKEN FROM YOU/OTHER HH MEMBER 2661-2665 V2714 5: AMNT CASH TAKEN FROM YOU/OTHER HH MEMBER 3276-3280 V3237 6: AMNT CASH TAKEN FROM YOU/OTHER HH MEMBER 3891-3895 V3760 7: AMNT CASH TAKEN FROM YOU/OTHER HH MEMBER 4506-4510 V623 1: LI WHAT TAKEN FROM YOU/OTHER HH MEMBER? 821-821 V1146 2: LI WHAT TAKEN FROM YOU/OTHER HH MEMBER? 1436-1436 V1669 3: LI WHAT TAKEN FROM YOU/OTHER HH MEMBER? 2051-2051 V2192 4: LI WHAT TAKEN FROM YOU/OTHER HH MEMBER? 2666-2666 V2715 5: LI WHAT TAKEN FROM YOU/OTHER HH MEMBER? 3281-3281 V3238 6: LI WHAT TAKEN FROM YOU/OTHER HH MEMBER? 3896-3896 V3761 7: LI WHAT TAKEN FROM YOU/OTHER HH MEMBER? 4511-4511 Page 69 V624 1: C ONLY CASH TAKEN 822-822 V1147 2: C ONLY CASH TAKEN 1437-1437 V1670 3: C ONLY CASH TAKEN 2052-2052 V2193 4: C ONLY CASH TAKEN 2667-2667 V2716 5: C ONLY CASH TAKEN 3282-3282 V3239 6: C ONLY CASH TAKEN 3897-3897 V3762 7: C ONLY CASH TAKEN 4512-4512 V625 1: C PURSE 823-823 V1148 2: C PURSE 1438-1438 V1671 3: C PURSE 2053-2053 V2194 4: C PURSE 2668-2668 V2717 5: C PURSE 3283-3283 V3240 6: C PURSE 3898-3898 V3763 7: C PURSE 4513-4513 V626 1: C WALLET 824-824 V1149 2: C WALLET 1439-1439 V1672 3: C WALLET 2054-2054 V2195 4: C WALLET 2669-2669 V2718 5: C WALLET 3284-3284 V3241 6: C WALLET 3899-3899 V3764 7: C WALLET 4514-4514 V627 1: C CREDIT CARDS, CHECKS, BANK CARDS 825-825 V1150 2: C CREDIT CARDS, CHECKS, BANK CARDS 1440-1440 V1673 3: C CREDIT CARDS, CHECKS, BANK CARDS 2055-2055 V2196 4: C CREDIT CARDS, CHECKS, BANK CARDS 2670-2670 V2719 5: C CREDIT CARDS, CHECKS, BANK CARDS 3285-3285 V3242 6: C CREDIT CARDS, CHECKS, BANK CARDS 3900-3900 V3765 7: C CREDIT CARDS, CHECKS, BANK CARDS 4515-4515 V628 1: C CAR 826-826 V1151 2: C CAR 1441-1441 V1674 3: C CAR 2056-2056 V2197 4: C CAR 2671-2671 V2720 5: C CAR 3286-3286 V3243 6: C CAR 3901-3901 V3766 7: C CAR 4516-4516 V629 1: C OTHER MOTOR VEHICLE 827-827 V1152 2: C OTHER MOTOR VEHICLE 1442-1442 V1675 3: C OTHER MOTOR VEHICLE 2057-2057 V2198 4: C OTHER MOTOR VEHICLE 2672-2672 V2721 5: C OTHER MOTOR VEHICLE 3287-3287 V3244 6: C OTHER MOTOR VEHICLE 3902-3902 V3767 7: C OTHER MOTOR VEHICLE 4517-4517 V630 1: C ATTACHED PART OF MOTOR VEHICLE 828-828 V1153 2: C ATTACHED PART OF MOTOR VEHICLE 1443-1443 V1676 3: C ATTACHED PART OF MOTOR VEHICLE 2058-2058 V2199 4: C ATTACHED PART OF MOTOR VEHICLE 2673-2673 V2722 5: C ATTACHED PART OF MOTOR VEHICLE 3288-3288 V3245 6: C ATTACHED PART OF MOTOR VEHICLE 3903-3903 V3768 7: C ATTACHED PART OF MOTOR VEHICLE 4518-4518 V631 1: C UNATTACHED MOTOR VEHICLE ACCESSORIES 829-829 V1154 2: C UNATTACHED MOTOR VEHICLE ACCESSORIES 1444-1444 V1677 3: C UNATTACHED MOTOR VEHICLE ACCESSORIES 2059-2059 V2200 4: C UNATTACHED MOTOR VEHICLE ACCESSORIES 2674-2674 V2723 5: C UNATTACHED MOTOR VEHICLE ACCESSORIES 3289-3289 Page 70 V3246 6: C UNATTACHED MOTOR VEHICLE ACCESSORIES 3904-3904 V3769 7: C UNATTACHED MOTOR VEHICLE ACCESSORIES 4519-4519 V632 1: C GASOLINE OR OIL 830-830 V1155 2: C GASOLINE OR OIL 1445-1445 V1678 3: C GASOLINE OR OIL 2060-2060 V2201 4: C GASOLINE OR OIL 2675-2675 V2724 5: C GASOLINE OR OIL 3290-3290 V3247 6: C GASOLINE OR OIL 3905-3905 V3770 7: C GASOLINE OR OIL 4520-4520 V633 1: C BICYCLE OR PARTS 831-831 V1156 2: C BICYCLE OR PARTS 1446-1446 V1679 3: C BICYCLE OR PARTS 2061-2061 V2202 4: C BICYCLE OR PARTS 2676-2676 V2725 5: C BICYCLE OR PARTS 3291-3291 V3248 6: C BICYCLE OR PARTS 3906-3906 V3771 7: C BICYCLE OR PARTS 4521-4521 V634 1: C TV, VCR, STEREO, OTHER HH APPLIANCES 832-832 V1157 2: C TV, VCR, STEREO, OTHER HH APPLIANCES 1447-1447 V1680 3: C TV, VCR, STEREO, OTHER HH APPLIANCES 2062-2062 V2203 4: C TV, VCR, STEREO, OTHER HH APPLIANCES 2677-2677 V2726 5: C TV, VCR, STEREO, OTHER HH APPLIANCES 3292-3292 V3249 6: C TV, VCR, STEREO, OTHER HH APPLIANCES 3907-3907 V3772 7: C TV, VCR, STEREO, OTHER HH APPLIANCES 4522-4522 V635 1: C SILVER, CHINA, ART OBJECTS 833-833 V1158 2: C SILVER, CHINA, ART OBJECTS 1448-1448 V1681 3: C SILVER, CHINA, ART OBJECTS 2063-2063 V2204 4: C SILVER, CHINA, ART OBJECTS 2678-2678 V2727 5: C SILVER, CHINA, ART OBJECTS 3293-3293 V3250 6: C SILVER, CHINA, ART OBJECTS 3908-3908 V3773 7: C SILVER, CHINA, ART OBJECTS 4523-4523 V636 1: C OTHER HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS 834-834 V1159 2: C OTHER HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS 1449-1449 V1682 3: C OTHER HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS 2064-2064 V2205 4: C OTHER HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS 2679-2679 V2728 5: C OTHER HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS 3294-3294 V3251 6: C OTHER HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS 3909-3909 V3774 7: C OTHER HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS 4524-4524 V637 1: C PORT. ELECTRONIC AND PHOTOGRAPHIC GEAR 835-835 V1160 2: C PORT. ELECTRONIC AND PHOTOGRAPHIC GEAR 1450-1450 V1683 3: C PORT. ELECTRONIC AND PHOTOGRAPHIC GEAR 2065-2065 V2206 4: C PORT. ELECTRONIC AND PHOTOGRAPHIC GEAR 2680-2680 V2729 5: C PORT. ELECTRONIC AND PHOTOGRAPHIC GEAR 3295-3295 V3252 6: C PORT. ELECTRONIC AND PHOTOGRAPHIC GEAR 3910-3910 V3775 7: C PORT. ELECTRONIC AND PHOTOGRAPHIC GEAR 4525-4525 V638 1: C CLOTHING, FURS, LUGGAGE 836-836 V1161 2: C CLOTHING, FURS, LUGGAGE 1451-1451 V1684 3: C CLOTHING, FURS, LUGGAGE 2066-2066 V2207 4: C CLOTHING, FURS, LUGGAGE 2681-2681 V2730 5: C CLOTHING, FURS, LUGGAGE 3296-3296 V3253 6: C CLOTHING, FURS, LUGGAGE 3911-3911 V3776 7: C CLOTHING, FURS, LUGGAGE 4526-4526 V639 1: C JEWELRY, WATCH, KEYS 837-837 V1162 2: C JEWELRY, WATCH, KEYS 1452-1452 V1685 3: C JEWELRY, WATCH, KEYS 2067-2067 Page 71 V2208 4: C JEWELRY, WATCH, KEYS 2682-2682 V2731 5: C JEWELRY, WATCH, KEYS 3297-3297 V3254 6: C JEWELRY, WATCH, KEYS 3912-3912 V3777 7: C JEWELRY, WATCH, KEYS 4527-4527 V640 1: C COLLECTION OF STAMPS, COINS, ETC. 838-838 V1163 2: C COLLECTION OF STAMPS, COINS, ETC. 1453-1453 V1686 3: C COLLECTION OF STAMPS, COINS, ETC. 2068-2068 V2209 4: C COLLECTION OF STAMPS, COINS, ETC. 2683-2683 V2732 5: C COLLECTION OF STAMPS, COINS, ETC. 3298-3298 V3255 6: C COLLECTION OF STAMPS, COINS, ETC. 3913-3913 V3778 7: C COLLECTION OF STAMPS, COINS, ETC. 4528-4528 V641 1: C TOYS, SPORTS AND RECREATION EQUIPMENT 839-839 V1164 2: C TOYS, SPORTS AND RECREATION EQUIPMENT 1454-1454 V1687 3: C TOYS, SPORTS AND RECREATION EQUIPMENT 2069-2069 V2210 4: C TOYS, SPORTS AND RECREATION EQUIPMENT 2684-2684 V2733 5: C TOYS, SPORTS AND RECREATION EQUIPMENT 3299-3299 V3256 6: C TOYS, SPORTS AND RECREATION EQUIPMENT 3914-3914 V3779 7: C TOYS, SPORTS AND RECREATION EQUIPMENT 4529-4529 V642 1: C OTHER PERSONAL AND PORTABLE OBJECTS 840-840 V1165 2: C OTHER PERSONAL AND PORTABLE OBJECTS 1455-1455 V1688 3: C OTHER PERSONAL AND PORTABLE OBJECTS 2070-2070 V2211 4: C OTHER PERSONAL AND PORTABLE OBJECTS 2685-2685 V2734 5: C OTHER PERSONAL AND PORTABLE OBJECTS 3300-3300 V3257 6: C OTHER PERSONAL AND PORTABLE OBJECTS 3915-3915 V3780 7: C OTHER PERSONAL AND PORTABLE OBJECTS 4530-4530 V643 1: C HANDGUN (PISTOL, REVOLVER) 841-841 V1166 2: C HANDGUN (PISTOL, REVOLVER) 1456-1456 V1689 3: C HANDGUN (PISTOL, REVOLVER) 2071-2071 V2212 4: C HANDGUN (PISTOL, REVOLVER) 2686-2686 V2735 5: C HANDGUN (PISTOL, REVOLVER) 3301-3301 V3258 6: C HANDGUN (PISTOL, REVOLVER) 3916-3916 V3781 7: C HANDGUN (PISTOL, REVOLVER) 4531-4531 V644 1: C OTHER FIREARM (RIFLE, SHOTGUN) 842-842 V1167 2: C OTHER FIREARM (RIFLE, SHOTGUN) 1457-1457 V1690 3: C OTHER FIREARM (RIFLE, SHOTGUN) 2072-2072 V2213 4: C OTHER FIREARM (RIFLE, SHOTGUN) 2687-2687 V2736 5: C OTHER FIREARM (RIFLE, SHOTGUN) 3302-3302 V3259 6: C OTHER FIREARM (RIFLE, SHOTGUN) 3917-3917 V3782 7: C OTHER FIREARM (RIFLE, SHOTGUN) 4532-4532 V645 1: C TOOLS, MACHINES, OFFICE EQUIPMENT 843-843 V1168 2: C TOOLS, MACHINES, OFFICE EQUIPMENT 1458-1458 V1691 3: C TOOLS, MACHINES, OFFICE EQUIPMENT 2073-2073 V2214 4: C TOOLS, MACHINES, OFFICE EQUIPMENT 2688-2688 V2737 5: C TOOLS, MACHINES, OFFICE EQUIPMENT 3303-3303 V3260 6: C TOOLS, MACHINES, OFFICE EQUIPMENT 3918-3918 V3783 7: C TOOLS, MACHINES, OFFICE EQUIPMENT 4533-4533 V646 1: C FARM OR GARDEN PROD,PLANTS,FRUIT,LOGS 844-844 V1169 2: C FARM OR GARDEN PROD,PLANTS,FRUIT,LOGS 1459-1459 V1692 3: C FARM OR GARDEN PROD,PLANTS,FRUIT,LOGS 2074-2074 V2215 4: C FARM OR GARDEN PROD,PLANTS,FRUIT,LOGS 2689-2689 V2738 5: C FARM OR GARDEN PROD,PLANTS,FRUIT,LOGS 3304-3304 V3261 6: C FARM OR GARDEN PROD,PLANTS,FRUIT,LOGS 3919-3919 V3784 7: C FARM OR GARDEN PROD,PLANTS,FRUIT,LOGS 4534-4534 Page 72 V647 1: C ANIMALS - PET OR LIVESTOCK 845-845 V1170 2: C ANIMALS - PET OR LIVESTOCK 1460-1460 V1693 3: C ANIMALS - PET OR LIVESTOCK 2075-2075 V2216 4: C ANIMALS - PET OR LIVESTOCK 2690-2690 V2739 5: C ANIMALS - PET OR LIVESTOCK 3305-3305 V3262 6: C ANIMALS - PET OR LIVESTOCK 3920-3920 V3785 7: C ANIMALS - PET OR LIVESTOCK 4535-4535 V648 1: C FOOD OR LIQUOR 846-846 V1171 2: C FOOD OR LIQUOR 1461-1461 V1694 3: C FOOD OR LIQUOR 2076-2076 V2217 4: C FOOD OR LIQUOR 2691-2691 V2740 5: C FOOD OR LIQUOR 3306-3306 V3263 6: C FOOD OR LIQUOR 3921-3921 V3786 7: C FOOD OR LIQUOR 4536-4536 V649 1: C OTHER-SPECIFY 847-847 V1172 2: C OTHER-SPECIFY 1462-1462 V1695 3: C OTHER-SPECIFY 2077-2077 V2218 4: C OTHER-SPECIFY 2692-2692 V2741 5: C OTHER-SPECIFY 3307-3307 V3264 6: C OTHER-SPECIFY 3922-3922 V3787 7: C OTHER-SPECIFY 4537-4537 V650 1: C DON'T KNOW 848-848 V1173 2: C DON'T KNOW 1463-1463 V1696 3: C DON'T KNOW 2078-2078 V2219 4: C DON'T KNOW 2693-2693 V2742 5: C DON'T KNOW 3308-3308 V3265 6: C DON'T KNOW 3923-3923 V3788 7: C DON'T KNOW 4538-4538 V651 1: RESIDUE TAKEN FROM YOU/OTHER HH MEMBER 849-849 V1174 2: RESIDUE TAKEN FROM YOU/OTHER HH MEMBER 1464-1464 V1697 3: RESIDUE TAKEN FROM YOU/OTHER HH MEMBER 2079-2079 V2220 4: RESIDUE TAKEN FROM YOU/OTHER HH MEMBER 2694-2694 V2743 5: RESIDUE TAKEN FROM YOU/OTHER HH MEMBER 3309-3309 V3266 6: RESIDUE TAKEN FROM YOU/OTHER HH MEMBER 3924-3924 V3789 7: RESIDUE TAKEN FROM YOU/OTHER HH MEMBER 4539-4539 V652 1: OWNER OF THE STOLEN PROPERTY 850-850 V1175 2: OWNER OF THE STOLEN PROPERTY 1465-1465 V1698 3: OWNER OF THE STOLEN PROPERTY 2080-2080 V2221 4: OWNER OF THE STOLEN PROPERTY 2695-2695 V2744 5: OWNER OF THE STOLEN PROPERTY 3310-3310 V3267 6: OWNER OF THE STOLEN PROPERTY 3925-3925 V3790 7: OWNER OF THE STOLEN PROPERTY 4540-4540 V653 1: FIRST HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 851-852 V1176 2: FIRST HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 1466-1467 V1699 3: FIRST HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 2081-2082 V2222 4: FIRST HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 2696-2697 V2745 5: FIRST HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 3311-3312 V3268 6: FIRST HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 3926-3927 V3791 7: FIRST HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 4541-4542 V654 1: SECOND HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 853-854 V1177 2: SECOND HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 1468-1469 V1700 3: SECOND HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 2083-2084 V2223 4: SECOND HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 2698-2699 V2746 5: SECOND HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 3313-3314 Page 73 V3269 6: SECOND HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 3928-3929 V3792 7: SECOND HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 4543-4544 V655 1: THIRD HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 855-856 V1178 2: THIRD HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 1470-1471 V1701 3: THIRD HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 2085-2086 V2224 4: THIRD HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 2700-2701 V2747 5: THIRD HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 3315-3316 V3270 6: THIRD HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 3930-3931 V3793 7: THIRD HH MEMBER THAT ALSO OWNED THE PROP 4545-4546 V656 1: OFF. EVER HAVE PERMISS TO USE CAR/MV? 857-857 V1179 2: OFF. EVER HAVE PERMISS TO USE CAR/MV? 1472-1472 V1702 3: OFF. EVER HAVE PERMISS TO USE CAR/MV? 2087-2087 V2225 4: OFF. EVER HAVE PERMISS TO USE CAR/MV? 2702-2702 V2748 5: OFF. EVER HAVE PERMISS TO USE CAR/MV? 3317-3317 V3271 6: OFF. EVER HAVE PERMISS TO USE CAR/MV? 3932-3932 V3794 7: OFF. EVER HAVE PERMISS TO USE CAR/MV? 4547-4547 V657 1: DID OFFENDER RETURN CAR/MV THIS TIME? 858-858 V1180 2: DID OFFENDER RETURN CAR/MV THIS TIME? 1473-1473 V1703 3: DID OFFENDER RETURN CAR/MV THIS TIME? 2088-2088 V2226 4: DID OFFENDER RETURN CAR/MV THIS TIME? 2703-2703 V2749 5: DID OFFENDER RETURN CAR/MV THIS TIME? 3318-3318 V3272 6: DID OFFENDER RETURN CAR/MV THIS TIME? 3933-3933 V3795 7: DID OFFENDER RETURN CAR/MV THIS TIME? 4548-4548 V658 1: ARTICLE(S) IN/ATTACHED TO MV WHEN TAKEN? 859-859 V1181 2: ARTICLE(S) IN/ATTACHED TO MV WHEN TAKEN? 1474-1474 V1704 3: ARTICLE(S) IN/ATTACHED TO MV WHEN TAKEN? 2089-2089 V2227 4: ARTICLE(S) IN/ATTACHED TO MV WHEN TAKEN? 2704-2704 V2750 5: ARTICLE(S) IN/ATTACHED TO MV WHEN TAKEN? 3319-3319 V3273 6: ARTICLE(S) IN/ATTACHED TO MV WHEN TAKEN? 3934-3934 V3796 7: ARTICLE(S) IN/ATTACHED TO MV WHEN TAKEN? 4549-4549 V659 1: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ORIGINAL) 860-860 V1182 2: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ORIGINAL) 1475-1475 V1705 3: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ORIGINAL) 2090-2090 V2228 4: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ORIGINAL) 2705-2705 V2751 5: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ORIGINAL) 3320-3320 V3274 6: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ORIGINAL) 3935-3935 V3797 7: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ORIGINAL) 4550-4550 V660 1: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ALLOCATED) 861-861 V1183 2: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ALLOCATED) 1476-1476 V1706 3: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ALLOCATED) 2091-2091 V2229 4: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ALLOCATED) 2706-2706 V2752 5: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ALLOCATED) 3321-3321 V3275 6: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ALLOCATED) 3936-3936 V3798 7: (CASH/PURSE/WALLET) ON PERSON?(ALLOCATED) 4551-4551 V661 1: TAKE ANYTHING (ELSE) DIRECTLY FROM YOU? 862-862 V1184 2: TAKE ANYTHING (ELSE) DIRECTLY FROM YOU? 1477-1477 V1707 3: TAKE ANYTHING (ELSE) DIRECTLY FROM YOU? 2092-2092 V2230 4: TAKE ANYTHING (ELSE) DIRECTLY FROM YOU? 2707-2707 V2753 5: TAKE ANYTHING (ELSE) DIRECTLY FROM YOU? 3322-3322 V3276 6: TAKE ANYTHING (ELSE) DIRECTLY FROM YOU? 3937-3937 V3799 7: TAKE ANYTHING (ELSE) DIRECTLY FROM YOU? 4552-4552 V662 1: FIRST ITEM TAKEN 863-864 V1185 2: FIRST ITEM TAKEN 1478-1479 V1708 3: FIRST ITEM TAKEN 2093-2094 Page 74 V2231 4: FIRST ITEM TAKEN 2708-2709 V2754 5: FIRST ITEM TAKEN 3323-3324 V3277 6: FIRST ITEM TAKEN 3938-3939 V3800 7: FIRST ITEM TAKEN 4553-4554 V663 1: SECOND ITEM TAKEN 865-866 V1186 2: SECOND ITEM TAKEN 1480-1481 V1709 3: SECOND ITEM TAKEN 2095-2096 V2232 4: SECOND ITEM TAKEN 2710-2711 V2755 5: SECOND ITEM TAKEN 3325-3326 V3278 6: SECOND ITEM TAKEN 3940-3941 V3801 7: SECOND ITEM TAKEN 4555-4556 V664 1: THIRD ITEM TAKEN 867-868 V1187 2: THIRD ITEM TAKEN 1482-1483 V1710 3: THIRD ITEM TAKEN 2097-2098 V2233 4: THIRD ITEM TAKEN 2712-2713 V2756 5: THIRD ITEM TAKEN 3327-3328 V3279 6: THIRD ITEM TAKEN 3942-3943 V3802 7: THIRD ITEM TAKEN 4557-4558 V665 1: VALUE OF THE PROPERTY THAT WAS TAKEN? 869-873 V1188 2: VALUE OF THE PROPERTY THAT WAS TAKEN? 1484-1488 V1711 3: VALUE OF THE PROPERTY THAT WAS TAKEN? 2099-2103 V2234 4: VALUE OF THE PROPERTY THAT WAS TAKEN? 2714-2718 V2757 5: VALUE OF THE PROPERTY THAT WAS TAKEN? 3329-3333 V3280 6: VALUE OF THE PROPERTY THAT WAS TAKEN? 3944-3948 V3803 7: VALUE OF THE PROPERTY THAT WAS TAKEN? 4559-4563 V666 1: LI HOW YOU DECIDE VALUE OF PROP TAKEN? 874-874 V1189 2: LI HOW YOU DECIDE VALUE OF PROP TAKEN? 1489-1489 V1712 3: LI HOW YOU DECIDE VALUE OF PROP TAKEN? 2104-2104 V2235 4: LI HOW YOU DECIDE VALUE OF PROP TAKEN? 2719-2719 V2758 5: LI HOW YOU DECIDE VALUE OF PROP TAKEN? 3334-3334 V3281 6: LI HOW YOU DECIDE VALUE OF PROP TAKEN? 3949-3949 V3804 7: LI HOW YOU DECIDE VALUE OF PROP TAKEN? 4564-4564 V667 1: C ORIGINAL COST 875-875 V1190 2: C ORIGINAL COST 1490-1490 V1713 3: C ORIGINAL COST 2105-2105 V2236 4: C ORIGINAL COST 2720-2720 V2759 5: C ORIGINAL COST 3335-3335 V3282 6: C ORIGINAL COST 3950-3950 V3805 7: C ORIGINAL COST 4565-4565 V668 1: C REPLACEMENT COST 876-876 V1191 2: C REPLACEMENT COST 1491-1491 V1714 3: C REPLACEMENT COST 2106-2106 V2237 4: C REPLACEMENT COST 2721-2721 V2760 5: C REPLACEMENT COST 3336-3336 V3283 6: C REPLACEMENT COST 3951-3951 V3806 7: C REPLACEMENT COST 4566-4566 V669 1: C PERSONAL ESTIMATE OF CURRENT VALUE 877-877 V1192 2: C PERSONAL ESTIMATE OF CURRENT VALUE 1492-1492 V1715 3: C PERSONAL ESTIMATE OF CURRENT VALUE 2107-2107 V2238 4: C PERSONAL ESTIMATE OF CURRENT VALUE 2722-2722 V2761 5: C PERSONAL ESTIMATE OF CURRENT VALUE 3337-3337 V3284 6: C PERSONAL ESTIMATE OF CURRENT VALUE 3952-3952 V3807 7: C PERSONAL ESTIMATE OF CURRENT VALUE 4567-4567 Page 75 V670 1: C INSURANCE REPORT ESTIMATE 878-878 V1193 2: C INSURANCE REPORT ESTIMATE 1493-1493 V1716 3: C INSURANCE REPORT ESTIMATE 2108-2108 V2239 4: C INSURANCE REPORT ESTIMATE 2723-2723 V2762 5: C INSURANCE REPORT ESTIMATE 3338-3338 V3285 6: C INSURANCE REPORT ESTIMATE 3953-3953 V3808 7: C INSURANCE REPORT ESTIMATE 4568-4568 V671 1: C POLICE ESTIMATE 879-879 V1194 2: C POLICE ESTIMATE 1494-1494 V1717 3: C POLICE ESTIMATE 2109-2109 V2240 4: C POLICE ESTIMATE 2724-2724 V2763 5: C POLICE ESTIMATE 3339-3339 V3286 6: C POLICE ESTIMATE 3954-3954 V3809 7: C POLICE ESTIMATE 4569-4569 V672 1: C DON'T KNOW 880-880 V1195 2: C DON'T KNOW 1495-1495 V1718 3: C DON'T KNOW 2110-2110 V2241 4: C DON'T KNOW 2725-2725 V2764 5: C DON'T KNOW 3340-3340 V3287 6: C DON'T KNOW 3955-3955 V3810 7: C DON'T KNOW 4570-4570 V673 1: C OTHER 881-881 V1196 2: C OTHER 1496-1496 V1719 3: C OTHER 2111-2111 V2242 4: C OTHER 2726-2726 V2765 5: C OTHER 3341-3341 V3288 6: C OTHER 3956-3956 V3811 7: C OTHER 4571-4571 V674 1: RESIDUE HOW DECIDE VALUE OF PROP TAKEN? 882-882 V1197 2: RESIDUE HOW DECIDE VALUE OF PROP TAKEN? 1497-1497 V1720 3: RESIDUE HOW DECIDE VALUE OF PROP TAKEN? 2112-2112 V2243 4: RESIDUE HOW DECIDE VALUE OF PROP TAKEN? 2727-2727 V2766 5: RESIDUE HOW DECIDE VALUE OF PROP TAKEN? 3342-3342 V3289 6: RESIDUE HOW DECIDE VALUE OF PROP TAKEN? 3957-3957 V3812 7: RESIDUE HOW DECIDE VALUE OF PROP TAKEN? 4572-4572 V675 1: ALL/PART OF STOLEN MONEY/PROP RECOVERED? 883-883 V1198 2: ALL/PART OF STOLEN MONEY/PROP RECOVERED? 1498-1498 V1721 3: ALL/PART OF STOLEN MONEY/PROP RECOVERED? 2113-2113 V2244 4: ALL/PART OF STOLEN MONEY/PROP RECOVERED? 2728-2728 V2767 5: ALL/PART OF STOLEN MONEY/PROP RECOVERED? 3343-3343 V3290 6: ALL/PART OF STOLEN MONEY/PROP RECOVERED? 3958-3958 V3813 7: ALL/PART OF STOLEN MONEY/PROP RECOVERED? 4573-4573 V676 1: AMOUNT OF CASH RECOVERED 884-888 V1199 2: AMOUNT OF CASH RECOVERED 1499-1503 V1722 3: AMOUNT OF CASH RECOVERED 2114-2118 V2245 4: AMOUNT OF CASH RECOVERED 2729-2733 V2768 5: AMOUNT OF CASH RECOVERED 3344-3348 V3291 6: AMOUNT OF CASH RECOVERED 3959-3963 V3814 7: AMOUNT OF CASH RECOVERED 4574-4578 V677 1: LI WHAT WAS RECOVERED? 889-889 V1200 2: LI WHAT WAS RECOVERED? 1504-1504 V1723 3: LI WHAT WAS RECOVERED? 2119-2119 V2246 4: LI WHAT WAS RECOVERED? 2734-2734 V2769 5: LI WHAT WAS RECOVERED? 3349-3349 Page 76 V3292 6: LI WHAT WAS RECOVERED? 3964-3964 V3815 7: LI WHAT WAS RECOVERED? 4579-4579 V678 1: C ONLY CASH RECOVERED 890-890 V1201 2: C ONLY CASH RECOVERED 1505-1505 V1724 3: C ONLY CASH RECOVERED 2120-2120 V2247 4: C ONLY CASH RECOVERED 2735-2735 V2770 5: C ONLY CASH RECOVERED 3350-3350 V3293 6: C ONLY CASH RECOVERED 3965-3965 V3816 7: C ONLY CASH RECOVERED 4580-4580 V679 1: C PURSE 891-891 V1202 2: C PURSE 1506-1506 V1725 3: C PURSE 2121-2121 V2248 4: C PURSE 2736-2736 V2771 5: C PURSE 3351-3351 V3294 6: C PURSE 3966-3966 V3817 7: C PURSE 4581-4581 V680 1: C WALLET 892-892 V1203 2: C WALLET 1507-1507 V1726 3: C WALLET 2122-2122 V2249 4: C WALLET 2737-2737 V2772 5: C WALLET 3352-3352 V3295 6: C WALLET 3967-3967 V3818 7: C WALLET 4582-4582 V681 1: C CREDIT CARDS, CHECKS, BANK CARDS 893-893 V1204 2: C CREDIT CARDS, CHECKS, BANK CARDS 1508-1508 V1727 3: C CREDIT CARDS, CHECKS, BANK CARDS 2123-2123 V2250 4: C CREDIT CARDS, CHECKS, BANK CARDS 2738-2738 V2773 5: C CREDIT CARDS, CHECKS, BANK CARDS 3353-3353 V3296 6: C CREDIT CARDS, CHECKS, BANK CARDS 3968-3968 V3819 7: C CREDIT CARDS, CHECKS, BANK CARDS 4583-4583 V682 1: C CAR OR OTHER MOTOR VEHICLE 894-894 V1205 2: C CAR OR OTHER MOTOR VEHICLE 1509-1509 V1728 3: C CAR OR OTHER MOTOR VEHICLE 2124-2124 V2251 4: C CAR OR OTHER MOTOR VEHICLE 2739-2739 V2774 5: C CAR OR OTHER MOTOR VEHICLE 3354-3354 V3297 6: C CAR OR OTHER MOTOR VEHICLE 3969-3969 V3820 7: C CAR OR OTHER MOTOR VEHICLE 4584-4584 V683 1: C PROPERTY OTHER THAN THE ABOVE 895-895 V1206 2: C PROPERTY OTHER THAN THE ABOVE 1510-1510 V1729 3: C PROPERTY OTHER THAN THE ABOVE 2125-2125 V2252 4: C PROPERTY OTHER THAN THE ABOVE 2740-2740 V2775 5: C PROPERTY OTHER THAN THE ABOVE 3355-3355 V3298 6: C PROPERTY OTHER THAN THE ABOVE 3970-3970 V3821 7: C PROPERTY OTHER THAN THE ABOVE 4585-4585 V684 1: RESIDUE WHAT WAS RECOVERED? 896-896 V1207 2: RESIDUE WHAT WAS RECOVERED? 1511-1511 V1730 3: RESIDUE WHAT WAS RECOVERED? 2126-2126 V2253 4: RESIDUE WHAT WAS RECOVERED? 2741-2741 V2776 5: RESIDUE WHAT WAS RECOVERED? 3356-3356 V3299 6: RESIDUE WHAT WAS RECOVERED? 3971-3971 V3822 7: RESIDUE WHAT WAS RECOVERED? 4586-4586 V685 1: PROPERTY (NOT CASH/CHECKS/CC) RECOVERED? 897-897 V1208 2: PROPERTY (NOT CASH/CHECKS/CC) RECOVERED? 1512-1512 V1731 3: PROPERTY (NOT CASH/CHECKS/CC) RECOVERED? 2127-2127 Page 77 V2254 4: PROPERTY (NOT CASH/CHECKS/CC) RECOVERED? 2742-2742 V2777 5: PROPERTY (NOT CASH/CHECKS/CC) RECOVERED? 3357-3357 V3300 6: PROPERTY (NOT CASH/CHECKS/CC) RECOVERED? 3972-3972 V3823 7: PROPERTY (NOT CASH/CHECKS/CC) RECOVERED? 4587-4587 V686 1: VALUE OF PROP AFTER RECOVERY (W/DAMAGE)? 898-902 V1209 2: VALUE OF PROP AFTER RECOVERY (W/DAMAGE)? 1513-1517 V1732 3: VALUE OF PROP AFTER RECOVERY (W/DAMAGE)? 2128-2132 V2255 4: VALUE OF PROP AFTER RECOVERY (W/DAMAGE)? 2743-2747 V2778 5: VALUE OF PROP AFTER RECOVERY (W/DAMAGE)? 3358-3362 V3301 6: VALUE OF PROP AFTER RECOVERY (W/DAMAGE)? 3973-3977 V3824 7: VALUE OF PROP AFTER RECOVERY (W/DAMAGE)? 4588-4592 V687 1: THEFT REPORTED TO AN INSURANCE COMPANY? 903-903 V1210 2: THEFT REPORTED TO AN INSURANCE COMPANY? 1518-1518 V1733 3: THEFT REPORTED TO AN INSURANCE COMPANY? 2133-2133 V2256 4: THEFT REPORTED TO AN INSURANCE COMPANY? 2748-2748 V2779 5: THEFT REPORTED TO AN INSURANCE COMPANY? 3363-3363 V3302 6: THEFT REPORTED TO AN INSURANCE COMPANY? 3978-3978 V3825 7: THEFT REPORTED TO AN INSURANCE COMPANY? 4593-4593 V688 1: ANY DAMAGED PROP BESIDES WHAT WAS STOLEN? 904-904 V1211 2: ANY DAMAGED PROP BESIDES WHAT WAS STOLEN? 1519-1519 V1734 3: ANY DAMAGED PROP BESIDES WHAT WAS STOLEN? 2134-2134 V2257 4: ANY DAMAGED PROP BESIDES WHAT WAS STOLEN? 2749-2749 V2780 5: ANY DAMAGED PROP BESIDES WHAT WAS STOLEN? 3364-3364 V3303 6: ANY DAMAGED PROP BESIDES WHAT WAS STOLEN? 3979-3979 V3826 7: ANY DAMAGED PROP BESIDES WHAT WAS STOLEN? 4594-4594 V689 1: DAMAGED ITEM(S) REPAIRED OR REPLACED? 905-905 V1212 2: DAMAGED ITEM(S) REPAIRED OR REPLACED? 1520-1520 V1735 3: DAMAGED ITEM(S) REPAIRED OR REPLACED? 2135-2135 V2258 4: DAMAGED ITEM(S) REPAIRED OR REPLACED? 2750-2750 V2781 5: DAMAGED ITEM(S) REPAIRED OR REPLACED? 3365-3365 V3304 6: DAMAGED ITEM(S) REPAIRED OR REPLACED? 3980-3980 V3827 7: DAMAGED ITEM(S) REPAIRED OR REPLACED? 4595-4595 V690 1: WOULD COST TO REPAIR/REPL DAMAGD ITEM(S)? 906-910 V1213 2: WOULD COST TO REPAIR/REPL DAMAGD ITEM(S)? 1521-1525 V1736 3: WOULD COST TO REPAIR/REPL DAMAGD ITEM(S)? 2136-2140 V2259 4: WOULD COST TO REPAIR/REPL DAMAGD ITEM(S)? 2751-2755 V2782 5: WOULD COST TO REPAIR/REPL DAMAGD ITEM(S)? 3366-3370 V3305 6: WOULD COST TO REPAIR/REPL DAMAGD ITEM(S)? 3981-3985 V3828 7: WOULD COST TO REPAIR/REPL DAMAGD ITEM(S)? 4596-4600 V691 1: ACTUAL REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT COST? 911-915 V1214 2: ACTUAL REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT COST? 1526-1530 V1737 3: ACTUAL REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT COST? 2141-2145 V2260 4: ACTUAL REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT COST? 2756-2760 V2783 5: ACTUAL REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT COST? 3371-3375 V3306 6: ACTUAL REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT COST? 3986-3990 V3829 7: ACTUAL REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT COST? 4601-4605 V692 1: LI WHO PAID/WILL PAY REPAIRS/REPLACEMENT? 916-916 V1215 2: LI WHO PAID/WILL PAY REPAIRS/REPLACEMENT? 1531-1531 V1738 3: LI WHO PAID/WILL PAY REPAIRS/REPLACEMENT? 2146-2146 V2261 4: LI WHO PAID/WILL PAY REPAIRS/REPLACEMENT? 2761-2761 V2784 5: LI WHO PAID/WILL PAY REPAIRS/REPLACEMENT? 3376-3376 V3307 6: LI WHO PAID/WILL PAY REPAIRS/REPLACEMENT? 3991-3991 V3830 7: LI WHO PAID/WILL PAY REPAIRS/REPLACEMENT? 4606-4606 Page 78 V693 1: C ITEMS WILL NOT BE REPAIRED OR REPLACED 917-917 V1216 2: C ITEMS WILL NOT BE REPAIRED OR REPLACED 1532-1532 V1739 3: C ITEMS WILL NOT BE REPAIRED OR REPLACED 2147-2147 V2262 4: C ITEMS WILL NOT BE REPAIRED OR REPLACED 2762-2762 V2785 5: C ITEMS WILL NOT BE REPAIRED OR REPLACED 3377-3377 V3308 6: C ITEMS WILL NOT BE REPAIRED OR REPLACED 3992-3992 V3831 7: C ITEMS WILL NOT BE REPAIRED OR REPLACED 4607-4607 V694 1: C HOUSEHOLD MEMBER 918-918 V1217 2: C HOUSEHOLD MEMBER 1533-1533 V1740 3: C HOUSEHOLD MEMBER 2148-2148 V2263 4: C HOUSEHOLD MEMBER 2763-2763 V2786 5: C HOUSEHOLD MEMBER 3378-3378 V3309 6: C HOUSEHOLD MEMBER 3993-3993 V3832 7: C HOUSEHOLD MEMBER 4608-4608 V695 1: C LANDLORD OR LANDLORD'S INSURANCE 919-919 V1218 2: C LANDLORD OR LANDLORD'S INSURANCE 1534-1534 V1741 3: C LANDLORD OR LANDLORD'S INSURANCE 2149-2149 V2264 4: C LANDLORD OR LANDLORD'S INSURANCE 2764-2764 V2787 5: C LANDLORD OR LANDLORD'S INSURANCE 3379-3379 V3310 6: C LANDLORD OR LANDLORD'S INSURANCE 3994-3994 V3833 7: C LANDLORD OR LANDLORD'S INSURANCE 4609-4609 V696 1: C VICTIM'S (OR HOUSEHOLD'S) INSURANCE 920-920 V1219 2: C VICTIM'S (OR HOUSEHOLD'S) INSURANCE 1535-1535 V1742 3: C VICTIM'S (OR HOUSEHOLD'S) INSURANCE 2150-2150 V2265 4: C VICTIM'S (OR HOUSEHOLD'S) INSURANCE 2765-2765 V2788 5: C VICTIM'S (OR HOUSEHOLD'S) INSURANCE 3380-3380 V3311 6: C VICTIM'S (OR HOUSEHOLD'S) INSURANCE 3995-3995 V3834 7: C VICTIM'S (OR HOUSEHOLD'S) INSURANCE 4610-4610 V697 1: C OFFENDER 921-921 V1220 2: C OFFENDER 1536-1536 V1743 3: C OFFENDER 2151-2151 V2266 4: C OFFENDER 2766-2766 V2789 5: C OFFENDER 3381-3381 V3312 6: C OFFENDER 3996-3996 V3835 7: C OFFENDER 4611-4611 V698 1: C OTHER 922-922 V1221 2: C OTHER 1537-1537 V1744 3: C OTHER 2152-2152 V2267 4: C OTHER 2767-2767 V2790 5: C OTHER 3382-3382 V3313 6: C OTHER 3997-3997 V3836 7: C OTHER 4612-4612 V699 1: RESIDUE WHO PAY REPAIRS/REPLACEMENT? 923-923 V1222 2: RESIDUE WHO PAY REPAIRS/REPLACEMENT? 1538-1538 V1745 3: RESIDUE WHO PAY REPAIRS/REPLACEMENT? 2153-2153 V2268 4: RESIDUE WHO PAY REPAIRS/REPLACEMENT? 2768-2768 V2791 5: RESIDUE WHO PAY REPAIRS/REPLACEMENT? 3383-3383 V3314 6: RESIDUE WHO PAY REPAIRS/REPLACEMENT? 3998-3998 V3837 7: RESIDUE WHO PAY REPAIRS/REPLACEMENT? 4613-4613 V700 1: POLICE INFORMED OR FOUND OUT IN ANY WAY? 924-924 V1223 2: POLICE INFORMED OR FOUND OUT IN ANY WAY? 1539-1539 V1746 3: POLICE INFORMED OR FOUND OUT IN ANY WAY? 2154-2154 V2269 4: POLICE INFORMED OR FOUND OUT IN ANY WAY? 2769-2769 V2792 5: POLICE INFORMED OR FOUND OUT IN ANY WAY? 3384-3384 Page 79 V3315 6: POLICE INFORMED OR FOUND OUT IN ANY WAY? 3999-3999 V3838 7: POLICE INFORMED OR FOUND OUT IN ANY WAY? 4614-4614 V701 1: HOW DID THE POLICE FIND OUT ABOUT IT? 925-925 V1224 2: HOW DID THE POLICE FIND OUT ABOUT IT? 1540-1540 V1747 3: HOW DID THE POLICE FIND OUT ABOUT IT? 2155-2155 V2270 4: HOW DID THE POLICE FIND OUT ABOUT IT? 2770-2770 V2793 5: HOW DID THE POLICE FIND OUT ABOUT IT? 3385-3385 V3316 6: HOW DID THE POLICE FIND OUT ABOUT IT? 4000-4000 V3839 7: HOW DID THE POLICE FIND OUT ABOUT IT? 4615-4615 V702 1: LI REASON(S) NOT REPORTED TO THE POLICE? 926-926 V1225 2: LI REASON(S) NOT REPORTED TO THE POLICE? 1541-1541 V1748 3: LI REASON(S) NOT REPORTED TO THE POLICE? 2156-2156 V2271 4: LI REASON(S) NOT REPORTED TO THE POLICE? 2771-2771 V2794 5: LI REASON(S) NOT REPORTED TO THE POLICE? 3386-3386 V3317 6: LI REASON(S) NOT REPORTED TO THE POLICE? 4001-4001 V3840 7: LI REASON(S) NOT REPORTED TO THE POLICE? 4616-4616 V703 1: C REPORTED TO ANOTHER OFFICIAL 927-927 V1226 2: C REPORTED TO ANOTHER OFFICIAL 1542-1542 V1749 3: C REPORTED TO ANOTHER OFFICIAL 2157-2157 V2272 4: C REPORTED TO ANOTHER OFFICIAL 2772-2772 V2795 5: C REPORTED TO ANOTHER OFFICIAL 3387-3387 V3318 6: C REPORTED TO ANOTHER OFFICIAL 4002-4002 V3841 7: C REPORTED TO ANOTHER OFFICIAL 4617-4617 V704 1: C TOOK CARE MYSELF/TOLD OFFENDER'S PARENT 928-928 V1227 2: C TOOK CARE MYSELF/TOLD OFFENDER'S PARENT 1543-1543 V1750 3: C TOOK CARE MYSELF/TOLD OFFENDER'S PARENT 2158-2158 V2273 4: C TOOK CARE MYSELF/TOLD OFFENDER'S PARENT 2773-2773 V2796 5: C TOOK CARE MYSELF/TOLD OFFENDER'S PARENT 3388-3388 V3319 6: C TOOK CARE MYSELF/TOLD OFFENDER'S PARENT 4003-4003 V3842 7: C TOOK CARE MYSELF/TOLD OFFENDER'S PARENT 4618-4618 V705 1: C SMALL OR NO LOSS, RECOVERED PROPERTY 929-929 V1228 2: C SMALL OR NO LOSS, RECOVERED PROPERTY 1544-1544 V1751 3: C SMALL OR NO LOSS, RECOVERED PROPERTY 2159-2159 V2274 4: C SMALL OR NO LOSS, RECOVERED PROPERTY 2774-2774 V2797 5: C SMALL OR NO LOSS, RECOVERED PROPERTY 3389-3389 V3320 6: C SMALL OR NO LOSS, RECOVERED PROPERTY 4004-4004 V3843 7: C SMALL OR NO LOSS, RECOVERED PROPERTY 4619-4619 V706 1: C CHILD OFFENDER(S), 'KID STUFF' 930-930 V1229 2: C CHILD OFFENDER(S), 'KID STUFF' 1545-1545 V1752 3: C CHILD OFFENDER(S), 'KID STUFF' 2160-2160 V2275 4: C CHILD OFFENDER(S), 'KID STUFF' 2775-2775 V2798 5: C CHILD OFFENDER(S), 'KID STUFF' 3390-3390 V3321 6: C CHILD OFFENDER(S), 'KID STUFF' 4005-4005 V3844 7: C CHILD OFFENDER(S), 'KID STUFF' 4620-4620 V707 1: C NOT CLEAR WAS A CRIME/HARM WAS INTENDED 931-931 V1230 2: C NOT CLEAR WAS A CRIME/HARM WAS INTENDED 1546-1546 V1753 3: C NOT CLEAR WAS A CRIME/HARM WAS INTENDED 2161-2161 V2276 4: C NOT CLEAR WAS A CRIME/HARM WAS INTENDED 2776-2776 V2799 5: C NOT CLEAR WAS A CRIME/HARM WAS INTENDED 3391-3391 V3322 6: C NOT CLEAR WAS A CRIME/HARM WAS INTENDED 4006-4006 V3845 7: C NOT CLEAR WAS A CRIME/HARM WAS INTENDED 4621-4621 V708 1: C NO INSURANCE/LOSS LESS THAN DEDUCTIBLE 932-932 V1231 2: C NO INSURANCE/LOSS LESS THAN DEDUCTIBLE 1547-1547 V1754 3: C NO INSURANCE/LOSS LESS THAN DEDUCTIBLE 2162-2162 Page 80 V2277 4: C NO INSURANCE/LOSS LESS THAN DEDUCTIBLE 2777-2777 V2800 5: C NO INSURANCE/LOSS LESS THAN DEDUCTIBLE 3392-3392 V3323 6: C NO INSURANCE/LOSS LESS THAN DEDUCTIBLE 4007-4007 V3846 7: C NO INSURANCE/LOSS LESS THAN DEDUCTIBLE 4622-4622 V709 1: C POLICE DIDN'T FIND OUT UNTIL TOO LATE 933-933 V1232 2: C POLICE DIDN'T FIND OUT UNTIL TOO LATE 1548-1548 V1755 3: C POLICE DIDN'T FIND OUT UNTIL TOO LATE 2163-2163 V2278 4: C POLICE DIDN'T FIND OUT UNTIL TOO LATE 2778-2778 V2801 5: C POLICE DIDN'T FIND OUT UNTIL TOO LATE 3393-3393 V3324 6: C POLICE DIDN'T FIND OUT UNTIL TOO LATE 4008-4008 V3847 7: C POLICE DIDN'T FIND OUT UNTIL TOO LATE 4623-4623 V710 1: C POLICE COULDN'T RECOVER/IDENTIFY PROP 934-934 V1233 2: C POLICE COULDN'T RECOVER/IDENTIFY PROP 1549-1549 V1756 3: C POLICE COULDN'T RECOVER/IDENTIFY PROP 2164-2164 V2279 4: C POLICE COULDN'T RECOVER/IDENTIFY PROP 2779-2779 V2802 5: C POLICE COULDN'T RECOVER/IDENTIFY PROP 3394-3394 V3325 6: C POLICE COULDN'T RECOVER/IDENTIFY PROP 4009-4009 V3848 7: C POLICE COULDN'T RECOVER/IDENTIFY PROP 4624-4624 V711 1: C POLICE COULDN'T FIND/IDENTIFY OFFENDER 935-935 V1234 2: C POLICE COULDN'T FIND/IDENTIFY OFFENDER 1550-1550 V1757 3: C POLICE COULDN'T FIND/IDENTIFY OFFENDER 2165-2165 V2280 4: C POLICE COULDN'T FIND/IDENTIFY OFFENDER 2780-2780 V2803 5: C POLICE COULDN'T FIND/IDENTIFY OFFENDER 3395-3395 V3326 6: C POLICE COULDN'T FIND/IDENTIFY OFFENDER 4010-4010 V3849 7: C POLICE COULDN'T FIND/IDENTIFY OFFENDER 4625-4625 V712 1: C POLICE WOULDN'T THINK IT WAS IMPORTANT 936-936 V1235 2: C POLICE WOULDN'T THINK IT WAS IMPORTANT 1551-1551 V1758 3: C POLICE WOULDN'T THINK IT WAS IMPORTANT 2166-2166 V2281 4: C POLICE WOULDN'T THINK IT WAS IMPORTANT 2781-2781 V2804 5: C POLICE WOULDN'T THINK IT WAS IMPORTANT 3396-3396 V3327 6: C POLICE WOULDN'T THINK IT WAS IMPORTANT 4011-4011 V3850 7: C POLICE WOULDN'T THINK IT WAS IMPORTANT 4626-4626 V713 1: C POLICE WOULD BE INEFFICIENT 937-937 V1236 2: C POLICE WOULD BE INEFFICIENT 1552-1552 V1759 3: C POLICE WOULD BE INEFFICIENT 2167-2167 V2282 4: C POLICE WOULD BE INEFFICIENT 2782-2782 V2805 5: C POLICE WOULD BE INEFFICIENT 3397-3397 V3328 6: C POLICE WOULD BE INEFFICIENT 4012-4012 V3851 7: C POLICE WOULD BE INEFFICIENT 4627-4627 V714 1: C POLICE WOULD BE BIASED 938-938 V1237 2: C POLICE WOULD BE BIASED 1553-1553 V1760 3: C POLICE WOULD BE BIASED 2168-2168 V2283 4: C POLICE WOULD BE BIASED 2783-2783 V2806 5: C POLICE WOULD BE BIASED 3398-3398 V3329 6: C POLICE WOULD BE BIASED 4013-4013 V3852 7: C POLICE WOULD BE BIASED 4628-4628 V715 1: C OFFENDER WAS A POLICE OFFICER 939-939 V1238 2: C OFFENDER WAS A POLICE OFFICER 1554-1554 V1761 3: C OFFENDER WAS A POLICE OFFICER 2169-2169 V2284 4: C OFFENDER WAS A POLICE OFFICER 2784-2784 V2807 5: C OFFENDER WAS A POLICE OFFICER 3399-3399 V3330 6: C OFFENDER WAS A POLICE OFFICER 4014-4014 V3853 7: C OFFENDER WAS A POLICE OFFICER 4629-4629 Page 81 V716 1: C DIDN'T WANT TO GET OFFENDER IN TROUBLE 940-940 V1239 2: C DIDN'T WANT TO GET OFFENDER IN TROUBLE 1555-1555 V1762 3: C DIDN'T WANT TO GET OFFENDER IN TROUBLE 2170-2170 V2285 4: C DIDN'T WANT TO GET OFFENDER IN TROUBLE 2785-2785 V2808 5: C DIDN'T WANT TO GET OFFENDER IN TROUBLE 3400-3400 V3331 6: C DIDN'T WANT TO GET OFFENDER IN TROUBLE 4015-4015 V3854 7: C DIDN'T WANT TO GET OFFENDER IN TROUBLE 4630-4630 V717 1: C WAS ADVISED NOT TO REPORT TO POLICE 941-941 V1240 2: C WAS ADVISED NOT TO REPORT TO POLICE 1556-1556 V1763 3: C WAS ADVISED NOT TO REPORT TO POLICE 2171-2171 V2286 4: C WAS ADVISED NOT TO REPORT TO POLICE 2786-2786 V2809 5: C WAS ADVISED NOT TO REPORT TO POLICE 3401-3401 V3332 6: C WAS ADVISED NOT TO REPORT TO POLICE 4016-4016 V3855 7: C WAS ADVISED NOT TO REPORT TO POLICE 4631-4631 V718 1: C AFRAID OF REPRISAL BY OFFENDER/OTHERS 942-942 V1241 2: C AFRAID OF REPRISAL BY OFFENDER/OTHERS 1557-1557 V1764 3: C AFRAID OF REPRISAL BY OFFENDER/OTHERS 2172-2172 V2287 4: C AFRAID OF REPRISAL BY OFFENDER/OTHERS 2787-2787 V2810 5: C AFRAID OF REPRISAL BY OFFENDER/OTHERS 3402-3402 V3333 6: C AFRAID OF REPRISAL BY OFFENDER/OTHERS 4017-4017 V3856 7: C AFRAID OF REPRISAL BY OFFENDER/OTHERS 4632-4632 V719 1: C DIDN'T WANT TO/COULD NOT TAKE TIME 943-943 V1242 2: C DIDN'T WANT TO/COULD NOT TAKE TIME 1558-1558 V1765 3: C DIDN'T WANT TO/COULD NOT TAKE TIME 2173-2173 V2288 4: C DIDN'T WANT TO/COULD NOT TAKE TIME 2788-2788 V2811 5: C DIDN'T WANT TO/COULD NOT TAKE TIME 3403-3403 V3334 6: C DIDN'T WANT TO/COULD NOT TAKE TIME 4018-4018 V3857 7: C DIDN'T WANT TO/COULD NOT TAKE TIME 4633-4633 V720 1: C OTHER- SPECIFY 944-944 V1243 2: C OTHER- SPECIFY 1559-1559 V1766 3: C OTHER- SPECIFY 2174-2174 V2289 4: C OTHER- SPECIFY 2789-2789 V2812 5: C OTHER- SPECIFY 3404-3404 V3335 6: C OTHER- SPECIFY 4019-4019 V3858 7: C OTHER- SPECIFY 4634-4634 V721 1: C RESP NOT PRESENT PR DOESN'T KNOW WHY 945-945 V1244 2: C RESP NOT PRESENT PR DOESN'T KNOW WHY 1560-1560 V1767 3: C RESP NOT PRESENT PR DOESN'T KNOW WHY 2175-2175 V2290 4: C RESP NOT PRESENT PR DOESN'T KNOW WHY 2790-2790 V2813 5: C RESP NOT PRESENT PR DOESN'T KNOW WHY 3405-3405 V3336 6: C RESP NOT PRESENT PR DOESN'T KNOW WHY 4020-4020 V3859 7: C RESP NOT PRESENT PR DOESN'T KNOW WHY 4635-4635 V722 1: RESIDUE REASON(S) NOT REPORTED TO POLICE? 946-946 V1245 2: RESIDUE REASON(S) NOT REPORTED TO POLICE? 1561-1561 V1768 3: RESIDUE REASON(S) NOT REPORTED TO POLICE? 2176-2176 V2291 4: RESIDUE REASON(S) NOT REPORTED TO POLICE? 2791-2791 V2814 5: RESIDUE REASON(S) NOT REPORTED TO POLICE? 3406-3406 V3337 6: RESIDUE REASON(S) NOT REPORTED TO POLICE? 4021-4021 V3860 7: RESIDUE REASON(S) NOT REPORTED TO POLICE? 4636-4636 V723 1: MOST IMPOR REASON NOT REPORTED TO POLICE? 947-948 V1246 2: MOST IMPOR REASON NOT REPORTED TO POLICE? 1562-1563 V1769 3: MOST IMPOR REASON NOT REPORTED TO POLICE? 2177-2178 V2292 4: MOST IMPOR REASON NOT REPORTED TO POLICE? 2792-2793 V2815 5: MOST IMPOR REASON NOT REPORTED TO POLICE? 3407-3408 Page 82 V3338 6: MOST IMPOR REASON NOT REPORTED TO POLICE? 4022-4023 V3861 7: MOST IMPOR REASON NOT REPORTED TO POLICE? 4637-4638 V724 1: LI REASON REPORTED TO POLICE? 949-949 V1247 2: LI REASON REPORTED TO POLICE? 1564-1564 V1770 3: LI REASON REPORTED TO POLICE? 2179-2179 V2293 4: LI REASON REPORTED TO POLICE? 2794-2794 V2816 5: LI REASON REPORTED TO POLICE? 3409-3409 V3339 6: LI REASON REPORTED TO POLICE? 4024-4024 V3862 7: LI REASON REPORTED TO POLICE? 4639-4639 V725 1: C STOP/PREVENT INCIDENT FROM HAPPENING 950-950 V1248 2: C STOP/PREVENT INCIDENT FROM HAPPENING 1565-1565 V1771 3: C STOP/PREVENT INCIDENT FROM HAPPENING 2180-2180 V2294 4: C STOP/PREVENT INCIDENT FROM HAPPENING 2795-2795 V2817 5: C STOP/PREVENT INCIDENT FROM HAPPENING 3410-3410 V3340 6: C STOP/PREVENT INCIDENT FROM HAPPENING 4025-4025 V3863 7: C STOP/PREVENT INCIDENT FROM HAPPENING 4640-4640 V726 1: C HELP AFTER INCIDENT DUE TO INJURY 951-951 V1249 2: C HELP AFTER INCIDENT DUE TO INJURY 1566-1566 V1772 3: C HELP AFTER INCIDENT DUE TO INJURY 2181-2181 V2295 4: C HELP AFTER INCIDENT DUE TO INJURY 2796-2796 V2818 5: C HELP AFTER INCIDENT DUE TO INJURY 3411-3411 V3341 6: C HELP AFTER INCIDENT DUE TO INJURY 4026-4026 V3864 7: C HELP AFTER INCIDENT DUE TO INJURY 4641-4641 V727 1: C TO RECOVER PROPERTY 952-952 V1250 2: C TO RECOVER PROPERTY 1567-1567 V1773 3: C TO RECOVER PROPERTY 2182-2182 V2296 4: C TO RECOVER PROPERTY 2797-2797 V2819 5: C TO RECOVER PROPERTY 3412-3412 V3342 6: C TO RECOVER PROPERTY 4027-4027 V3865 7: C TO RECOVER PROPERTY 4642-4642 V728 1: C TO COLLECT INSURANCE 953-953 V1251 2: C TO COLLECT INSURANCE 1568-1568 V1774 3: C TO COLLECT INSURANCE 2183-2183 V2297 4: C TO COLLECT INSURANCE 2798-2798 V2820 5: C TO COLLECT INSURANCE 3413-3413 V3343 6: C TO COLLECT INSURANCE 4028-4028 V3866 7: C TO COLLECT INSURANCE 4643-4643 V729 1: C PREVENT FURTHER CRIMES AGAINST RESP 954-954 V1252 2: C PREVENT FURTHER CRIMES AGAINST RESP 1569-1569 V1775 3: C PREVENT FURTHER CRIMES AGAINST RESP 2184-2184 V2298 4: C PREVENT FURTHER CRIMES AGAINST RESP 2799-2799 V2821 5: C PREVENT FURTHER CRIMES AGAINST RESP 3414-3414 V3344 6: C PREVENT FURTHER CRIMES AGAINST RESP 4029-4029 V3867 7: C PREVENT FURTHER CRIMES AGAINST RESP 4644-4644 V730 1: C STOP OFFENDER FROM COMMITTING CRIMES 955-955 V1253 2: C STOP OFFENDER FROM COMMITTING CRIMES 1570-1570 V1776 3: C STOP OFFENDER FROM COMMITTING CRIMES 2185-2185 V2299 4: C STOP OFFENDER FROM COMMITTING CRIMES 2800-2800 V2822 5: C STOP OFFENDER FROM COMMITTING CRIMES 3415-3415 V3345 6: C STOP OFFENDER FROM COMMITTING CRIMES 4030-4030 V3868 7: C STOP OFFENDER FROM COMMITTING CRIMES 4645-4645 V731 1: C TO PUNISH OFFENDER 956-956 V1254 2: C TO PUNISH OFFENDER 1571-1571 V1777 3: C TO PUNISH OFFENDER 2186-2186 Page 83 V2300 4: C TO PUNISH OFFENDER 2801-2801 V2823 5: C TO PUNISH OFFENDER 3416-3416 V3346 6: C TO PUNISH OFFENDER 4031-4031 V3869 7: C TO PUNISH OFFENDER 4646-4646 V732 1: C CATCH/FIND OFF-OTHER REASON/NO REASON 957-957 V1255 2: C CATCH/FIND OFF-OTHER REASON/NO REASON 1572-1572 V1778 3: C CATCH/FIND OFF-OTHER REASON/NO REASON 2187-2187 V2301 4: C CATCH/FIND OFF-OTHER REASON/NO REASON 2802-2802 V2824 5: C CATCH/FIND OFF-OTHER REASON/NO REASON 3417-3417 V3347 6: C CATCH/FIND OFF-OTHER REASON/NO REASON 4032-4032 V3870 7: C CATCH/FIND OFF-OTHER REASON/NO REASON 4647-4647 V733 1: C IMPROVE POL SURVEILLANCE OF RESP'S HOME 958-958 V1256 2: C IMPROVE POL SURVEILLANCE OF RESP'S HOME 1573-1573 V1779 3: C IMPROVE POL SURVEILLANCE OF RESP'S HOME 2188-2188 V2302 4: C IMPROVE POL SURVEILLANCE OF RESP'S HOME 2803-2803 V2825 5: C IMPROVE POL SURVEILLANCE OF RESP'S HOME 3418-3418 V3348 6: C IMPROVE POL SURVEILLANCE OF RESP'S HOME 4033-4033 V3871 7: C IMPROVE POL SURVEILLANCE OF RESP'S HOME 4648-4648 V734 1: C DUTY TO LET POLICE KNOW ABOUT CRIME 959-959 V1257 2: C DUTY TO LET POLICE KNOW ABOUT CRIME 1574-1574 V1780 3: C DUTY TO LET POLICE KNOW ABOUT CRIME 2189-2189 V2303 4: C DUTY TO LET POLICE KNOW ABOUT CRIME 2804-2804 V2826 5: C DUTY TO LET POLICE KNOW ABOUT CRIME 3419-3419 V3349 6: C DUTY TO LET POLICE KNOW ABOUT CRIME 4034-4034 V3872 7: C DUTY TO LET POLICE KNOW ABOUT CRIME 4649-4649 V735 1: C OTHER REASON - SPECIFY 960-960 V1258 2: C OTHER REASON - SPECIFY 1575-1575 V1781 3: C OTHER REASON - SPECIFY 2190-2190 V2304 4: C OTHER REASON - SPECIFY 2805-2805 V2827 5: C OTHER REASON - SPECIFY 3420-3420 V3350 6: C OTHER REASON - SPECIFY 4035-4035 V3873 7: C OTHER REASON - SPECIFY 4650-4650 V736 1: C NO OTHER REASON 961-961 V1259 2: C NO OTHER REASON 1576-1576 V1782 3: C NO OTHER REASON 2191-2191 V2305 4: C NO OTHER REASON 2806-2806 V2828 5: C NO OTHER REASON 3421-3421 V3351 6: C NO OTHER REASON 4036-4036 V3874 7: C NO OTHER REASON 4651-4651 V737 1: RESIDUE REASON REPORTED TO POLICE? 962-962 V1260 2: RESIDUE REASON REPORTED TO POLICE? 1577-1577 V1783 3: RESIDUE REASON REPORTED TO POLICE? 2192-2192 V2306 4: RESIDUE REASON REPORTED TO POLICE? 2807-2807 V2829 5: RESIDUE REASON REPORTED TO POLICE? 3422-3422 V3352 6: RESIDUE REASON REPORTED TO POLICE? 4037-4037 V3875 7: RESIDUE REASON REPORTED TO POLICE? 4652-4652 V738 1: MOST IMP REASON REPORTED TO POLICE? 963-964 V1261 2: MOST IMP REASON REPORTED TO POLICE? 1578-1579 V1784 3: MOST IMP REASON REPORTED TO POLICE? 2193-2194 V2307 4: MOST IMP REASON REPORTED TO POLICE? 2808-2809 V2830 5: MOST IMP REASON REPORTED TO POLICE? 3423-3424 V3353 6: MOST IMP REASON REPORTED TO POLICE? 4038-4039 V3876 7: MOST IMP REASON REPORTED TO POLICE? 4653-4654 Page 84 V739 1: POLICE CAME WHEN FOUND OUT ABOUT INCIDENT 965-965 V1262 2: POLICE CAME WHEN FOUND OUT ABOUT INCIDENT 1580-1580 V1785 3: POLICE CAME WHEN FOUND OUT ABOUT INCIDENT 2195-2195 V2308 4: POLICE CAME WHEN FOUND OUT ABOUT INCIDENT 2810-2810 V2831 5: POLICE CAME WHEN FOUND OUT ABOUT INCIDENT 3425-3425 V3354 6: POLICE CAME WHEN FOUND OUT ABOUT INCIDENT 4040-4040 V3877 7: POLICE CAME WHEN FOUND OUT ABOUT INCIDENT 4655-4655 V740 1: HOW SOON DID POLICE RESPOND? 966-966 V1263 2: HOW SOON DID POLICE RESPOND? 1581-1581 V1786 3: HOW SOON DID POLICE RESPOND? 2196-2196 V2309 4: HOW SOON DID POLICE RESPOND? 2811-2811 V2832 5: HOW SOON DID POLICE RESPOND? 3426-3426 V3355 6: HOW SOON DID POLICE RESPOND? 4041-4041 V3878 7: HOW SOON DID POLICE RESPOND? 4656-4656 V741 1: LI WHAT THEY DO WHILE THEY WERE THERE? 967-967 V1264 2: LI WHAT THEY DO WHILE THEY WERE THERE? 1582-1582 V1787 3: LI WHAT THEY DO WHILE THEY WERE THERE? 2197-2197 V2310 4: LI WHAT THEY DO WHILE THEY WERE THERE? 2812-2812 V2833 5: LI WHAT THEY DO WHILE THEY WERE THERE? 3427-3427 V3356 6: LI WHAT THEY DO WHILE THEY WERE THERE? 4042-4042 V3879 7: LI WHAT THEY DO WHILE THEY WERE THERE? 4657-4657 V742 1: C TOOK REPORT 968-968 V1265 2: C TOOK REPORT 1583-1583 V1788 3: C TOOK REPORT 2198-2198 V2311 4: C TOOK REPORT 2813-2813 V2834 5: C TOOK REPORT 3428-3428 V3357 6: C TOOK REPORT 4043-4043 V3880 7: C TOOK REPORT 4658-4658 V743 1: C SEARCHED/LOOKED AROUND 969-969 V1266 2: C SEARCHED/LOOKED AROUND 1584-1584 V1789 3: C SEARCHED/LOOKED AROUND 2199-2199 V2312 4: C SEARCHED/LOOKED AROUND 2814-2814 V2835 5: C SEARCHED/LOOKED AROUND 3429-3429 V3358 6: C SEARCHED/LOOKED AROUND 4044-4044 V3881 7: C SEARCHED/LOOKED AROUND 4659-4659 V744 1: C TOOK EVIDENCE 970-970 V1267 2: C TOOK EVIDENCE 1585-1585 V1790 3: C TOOK EVIDENCE 2200-2200 V2313 4: C TOOK EVIDENCE 2815-2815 V2836 5: C TOOK EVIDENCE 3430-3430 V3359 6: C TOOK EVIDENCE 4045-4045 V3882 7: C TOOK EVIDENCE 4660-4660 V745 1: C QUESTIONED WITNESSES OR SUSPECTS 971-971 V1268 2: C QUESTIONED WITNESSES OR SUSPECTS 1586-1586 V1791 3: C QUESTIONED WITNESSES OR SUSPECTS 2201-2201 V2314 4: C QUESTIONED WITNESSES OR SUSPECTS 2816-2816 V2837 5: C QUESTIONED WITNESSES OR SUSPECTS 3431-3431 V3360 6: C QUESTIONED WITNESSES OR SUSPECTS 4046-4046 V3883 7: C QUESTIONED WITNESSES OR SUSPECTS 4661-4661 V746 1: C PROMISED SURVEILLANCE 972-972 V1269 2: C PROMISED SURVEILLANCE 1587-1587 V1792 3: C PROMISED SURVEILLANCE 2202-2202 V2315 4: C PROMISED SURVEILLANCE 2817-2817 V2838 5: C PROMISED SURVEILLANCE 3432-3432 Page 85 V3361 6: C PROMISED SURVEILLANCE 4047-4047 V3884 7: C PROMISED SURVEILLANCE 4662-4662 V747 1: C PROMISED TO INVESTIGATE 973-973 V1270 2: C PROMISED TO INVESTIGATE 1588-1588 V1793 3: C PROMISED TO INVESTIGATE 2203-2203 V2316 4: C PROMISED TO INVESTIGATE 2818-2818 V2839 5: C PROMISED TO INVESTIGATE 3433-3433 V3362 6: C PROMISED TO INVESTIGATE 4048-4048 V3885 7: C PROMISED TO INVESTIGATE 4663-4663 V748 1: C MADE ARREST 974-974 V1271 2: C MADE ARREST 1589-1589 V1794 3: C MADE ARREST 2204-2204 V2317 4: C MADE ARREST 2819-2819 V2840 5: C MADE ARREST 3434-3434 V3363 6: C MADE ARREST 4049-4049 V3886 7: C MADE ARREST 4664-4664 V749 1: C OTHER 975-975 V1272 2: C OTHER 1590-1590 V1795 3: C OTHER 2205-2205 V2318 4: C OTHER 2820-2820 V2841 5: C OTHER 3435-3435 V3364 6: C OTHER 4050-4050 V3887 7: C OTHER 4665-4665 V750 1: C DON'T KNOW 976-976 V1273 2: C DON'T KNOW 1591-1591 V1796 3: C DON'T KNOW 2206-2206 V2319 4: C DON'T KNOW 2821-2821 V2842 5: C DON'T KNOW 3436-3436 V3365 6: C DON'T KNOW 4051-4051 V3888 7: C DON'T KNOW 4666-4666 V751 1: RESIDUE WHAT DID THEY DO WHILE THERE? 977-977 V1274 2: RESIDUE WHAT DID THEY DO WHILE THERE? 1592-1592 V1797 3: RESIDUE WHAT DID THEY DO WHILE THERE? 2207-2207 V2320 4: RESIDUE WHAT DID THEY DO WHILE THERE? 2822-2822 V2843 5: RESIDUE WHAT DID THEY DO WHILE THERE? 3437-3437 V3366 6: RESIDUE WHAT DID THEY DO WHILE THERE? 4052-4052 V3889 7: RESIDUE WHAT DID THEY DO WHILE THERE? 4667-4667 V752 1: LATER CONTACT WITH POLICE ABOUT INCIDENT? 978-978 V1275 2: LATER CONTACT WITH POLICE ABOUT INCIDENT? 1593-1593 V1798 3: LATER CONTACT WITH POLICE ABOUT INCIDENT? 2208-2208 V2321 4: LATER CONTACT WITH POLICE ABOUT INCIDENT? 2823-2823 V2844 5: LATER CONTACT WITH POLICE ABOUT INCIDENT? 3438-3438 V3367 6: LATER CONTACT WITH POLICE ABOUT INCIDENT? 4053-4053 V3890 7: LATER CONTACT WITH POLICE ABOUT INCIDENT? 4668-4668 V753 1: THEY GET IN TOUCH W/ YOU OR YOU W/ THEM? 979-979 V1276 2: THEY GET IN TOUCH W/ YOU OR YOU W/ THEM? 1594-1594 V1799 3: THEY GET IN TOUCH W/ YOU OR YOU W/ THEM? 2209-2209 V2322 4: THEY GET IN TOUCH W/ YOU OR YOU W/ THEM? 2824-2824 V2845 5: THEY GET IN TOUCH W/ YOU OR YOU W/ THEM? 3439-3439 V3368 6: THEY GET IN TOUCH W/ YOU OR YOU W/ THEM? 4054-4054 V3891 7: THEY GET IN TOUCH W/ YOU OR YOU W/ THEM? 4669-4669 V754 1: IN PERSON, BY PHONE, OR SOME OTHER WAY? 980-980 V1277 2: IN PERSON, BY PHONE, OR SOME OTHER WAY? 1595-1595 V1800 3: IN PERSON, BY PHONE, OR SOME OTHER WAY? 2210-2210 Page 86 V2323 4: IN PERSON, BY PHONE, OR SOME OTHER WAY? 2825-2825 V2846 5: IN PERSON, BY PHONE, OR SOME OTHER WAY? 3440-3440 V3369 6: IN PERSON, BY PHONE, OR SOME OTHER WAY? 4055-4055 V3892 7: IN PERSON, BY PHONE, OR SOME OTHER WAY? 4670-4670 V755 1: LI WHAT POLICE DID FOLLOWING UP INCIDENT 981-981 V1278 2: LI WHAT POLICE DID FOLLOWING UP INCIDENT 1596-1596 V1801 3: LI WHAT POLICE DID FOLLOWING UP INCIDENT 2211-2211 V2324 4: LI WHAT POLICE DID FOLLOWING UP INCIDENT 2826-2826 V2847 5: LI WHAT POLICE DID FOLLOWING UP INCIDENT 3441-3441 V3370 6: LI WHAT POLICE DID FOLLOWING UP INCIDENT 4056-4056 V3893 7: LI WHAT POLICE DID FOLLOWING UP INCIDENT 4671-4671 V756 1: C TOOK REPORT 982-982 V1279 2: C TOOK REPORT 1597-1597 V1802 3: C TOOK REPORT 2212-2212 V2325 4: C TOOK REPORT 2827-2827 V2848 5: C TOOK REPORT 3442-3442 V3371 6: C TOOK REPORT 4057-4057 V3894 7: C TOOK REPORT 4672-4672 V757 1: C QUESTIONED WITNESSES OR SUSPECTS 983-983 V1280 2: C QUESTIONED WITNESSES OR SUSPECTS 1598-1598 V1803 3: C QUESTIONED WITNESSES OR SUSPECTS 2213-2213 V2326 4: C QUESTIONED WITNESSES OR SUSPECTS 2828-2828 V2849 5: C QUESTIONED WITNESSES OR SUSPECTS 3443-3443 V3372 6: C QUESTIONED WITNESSES OR SUSPECTS 4058-4058 V3895 7: C QUESTIONED WITNESSES OR SUSPECTS 4673-4673 V758 1: C DID/PROMISED SURVEILLANCE/INVESTIGATION 984-984 V1281 2: C DID/PROMISED SURVEILLANCE/INVESTIGATION 1599-1599 V1804 3: C DID/PROMISED SURVEILLANCE/INVESTIGATION 2214-2214 V2327 4: C DID/PROMISED SURVEILLANCE/INVESTIGATION 2829-2829 V2850 5: C DID/PROMISED SURVEILLANCE/INVESTIGATION 3444-3444 V3373 6: C DID/PROMISED SURVEILLANCE/INVESTIGATION 4059-4059 V3896 7: C DID/PROMISED SURVEILLANCE/INVESTIGATION 4674-4674 V759 1: C RECOVERED PROPERTY 985-985 V1282 2: C RECOVERED PROPERTY 1600-1600 V1805 3: C RECOVERED PROPERTY 2215-2215 V2328 4: C RECOVERED PROPERTY 2830-2830 V2851 5: C RECOVERED PROPERTY 3445-3445 V3374 6: C RECOVERED PROPERTY 4060-4060 V3897 7: C RECOVERED PROPERTY 4675-4675 V760 1: C MADE ARREST 986-986 V1283 2: C MADE ARREST 1601-1601 V1806 3: C MADE ARREST 2216-2216 V2329 4: C MADE ARREST 2831-2831 V2852 5: C MADE ARREST 3446-3446 V3375 6: C MADE ARREST 4061-4061 V3898 7: C MADE ARREST 4676-4676 V761 1: C STAYED IN TOUCH W/ RESPONDENT/HOUSEHOLD 987-987 V1284 2: C STAYED IN TOUCH W/ RESPONDENT/HOUSEHOLD 1602-1602 V1807 3: C STAYED IN TOUCH W/ RESPONDENT/HOUSEHOLD 2217-2217 V2330 4: C STAYED IN TOUCH W/ RESPONDENT/HOUSEHOLD 2832-2832 V2853 5: C STAYED IN TOUCH W/ RESPONDENT/HOUSEHOLD 3447-3447 V3376 6: C STAYED IN TOUCH W/ RESPONDENT/HOUSEHOLD 4062-4062 V3899 7: C STAYED IN TOUCH W/ RESPONDENT/HOUSEHOLD 4677-4677 Page 87 V762 1: C OTHER 988-988 V1285 2: C OTHER 1603-1603 V1808 3: C OTHER 2218-2218 V2331 4: C OTHER 2833-2833 V2854 5: C OTHER 3448-3448 V3377 6: C OTHER 4063-4063 V3900 7: C OTHER 4678-4678 V763 1: C NOTHING (TO RESPONDENT'S KNOWLEDGE) 989-989 V1286 2: C NOTHING (TO RESPONDENT'S KNOWLEDGE) 1604-1604 V1809 3: C NOTHING (TO RESPONDENT'S KNOWLEDGE) 2219-2219 V2332 4: C NOTHING (TO RESPONDENT'S KNOWLEDGE) 2834-2834 V2855 5: C NOTHING (TO RESPONDENT'S KNOWLEDGE) 3449-3449 V3378 6: C NOTHING (TO RESPONDENT'S KNOWLEDGE) 4064-4064 V3901 7: C NOTHING (TO RESPONDENT'S KNOWLEDGE) 4679-4679 V764 1: C DON'T KNOW 990-990 V1287 2: C DON'T KNOW 1605-1605 V1810 3: C DON'T KNOW 2220-2220 V2333 4: C DON'T KNOW 2835-2835 V2856 5: C DON'T KNOW 3450-3450 V3379 6: C DON'T KNOW 4065-4065 V3902 7: C DON'T KNOW 4680-4680 V765 1: RESIDUE WHAT POLICE DID FOLLOWING UP 991-991 V1288 2: RESIDUE WHAT POLICE DID FOLLOWING UP 1606-1606 V1811 3: RESIDUE WHAT POLICE DID FOLLOWING UP 2221-2221 V2334 4: RESIDUE WHAT POLICE DID FOLLOWING UP 2836-2836 V2857 5: RESIDUE WHAT POLICE DID FOLLOWING UP 3451-3451 V3380 6: RESIDUE WHAT POLICE DID FOLLOWING UP 4066-4066 V3903 7: RESIDUE WHAT POLICE DID FOLLOWING UP 4681-4681 V766 1: YOU/HH MEM SIGN COMPLAINT AGAINST OFF? 992-992 V1289 2: YOU/HH MEM SIGN COMPLAINT AGAINST OFF? 1607-1607 V1812 3: YOU/HH MEM SIGN COMPLAINT AGAINST OFF? 2222-2222 V2335 4: YOU/HH MEM SIGN COMPLAINT AGAINST OFF? 2837-2837 V2858 5: YOU/HH MEM SIGN COMPLAINT AGAINST OFF? 3452-3452 V3381 6: YOU/HH MEM SIGN COMPLAINT AGAINST OFF? 4067-4067 V3904 7: YOU/HH MEM SIGN COMPLAINT AGAINST OFF? 4682-4682 V767 1: YOU KNOW OF ANYONE ARRESTED OR CHARGED? 993-993 V1290 2: YOU KNOW OF ANYONE ARRESTED OR CHARGED? 1608-1608 V1813 3: YOU KNOW OF ANYONE ARRESTED OR CHARGED? 2223-2223 V2336 4: YOU KNOW OF ANYONE ARRESTED OR CHARGED? 2838-2838 V2859 5: YOU KNOW OF ANYONE ARRESTED OR CHARGED? 3453-3453 V3382 6: YOU KNOW OF ANYONE ARRESTED OR CHARGED? 4068-4068 V3905 7: YOU KNOW OF ANYONE ARRESTED OR CHARGED? 4683-4683 V768 1: GET HELP/ADVICE FOR VICTIMS OF CRIME? 994-994 V1291 2: GET HELP/ADVICE FOR VICTIMS OF CRIME? 1609-1609 V1814 3: GET HELP/ADVICE FOR VICTIMS OF CRIME? 2224-2224 V2337 4: GET HELP/ADVICE FOR VICTIMS OF CRIME? 2839-2839 V2860 5: GET HELP/ADVICE FOR VICTIMS OF CRIME? 3454-3454 V3383 6: GET HELP/ADVICE FOR VICTIMS OF CRIME? 4069-4069 V3906 7: GET HELP/ADVICE FOR VICTIMS OF CRIME? 4684-4684 V769 1: WAS IT A GOVERNMENT OR A PRIVATE AGENCY? 995-995 V1292 2: WAS IT A GOVERNMENT OR A PRIVATE AGENCY? 1610-1610 V1815 3: WAS IT A GOVERNMENT OR A PRIVATE AGENCY? 2225-2225 V2338 4: WAS IT A GOVERNMENT OR A PRIVATE AGENCY? 2840-2840 V2861 5: WAS IT A GOVERNMENT OR A PRIVATE AGENCY? 3455-3455 Page 88 V3384 6: WAS IT A GOVERNMENT OR A PRIVATE AGENCY? 4070-4070 V3907 7: WAS IT A GOVERNMENT OR A PRIVATE AGENCY? 4685-4685 V770 1: CONTACTED ANY OTHER AUTHORITIES? 996-996 V1293 2: CONTACTED ANY OTHER AUTHORITIES? 1611-1611 V1816 3: CONTACTED ANY OTHER AUTHORITIES? 2226-2226 V2339 4: CONTACTED ANY OTHER AUTHORITIES? 2841-2841 V2862 5: CONTACTED ANY OTHER AUTHORITIES? 3456-3456 V3385 6: CONTACTED ANY OTHER AUTHORITIES? 4071-4071 V3908 7: CONTACTED ANY OTHER AUTHORITIES? 4686-4686 V771 1: LI WHICH AUTHORITIES? 997-997 V1294 2: LI WHICH AUTHORITIES? 1612-1612 V1817 3: LI WHICH AUTHORITIES? 2227-2227 V2340 4: LI WHICH AUTHORITIES? 2842-2842 V2863 5: LI WHICH AUTHORITIES? 3457-3457 V3386 6: LI WHICH AUTHORITIES? 4072-4072 V3909 7: LI WHICH AUTHORITIES? 4687-4687 V772 1: C PROSECUTOR, DISTRICT ATTORNEY 998-998 V1295 2: C PROSECUTOR, DISTRICT ATTORNEY 1613-1613 V1818 3: C PROSECUTOR, DISTRICT ATTORNEY 2228-2228 V2341 4: C PROSECUTOR, DISTRICT ATTORNEY 2843-2843 V2864 5: C PROSECUTOR, DISTRICT ATTORNEY 3458-3458 V3387 6: C PROSECUTOR, DISTRICT ATTORNEY 4073-4073 V3910 7: C PROSECUTOR, DISTRICT ATTORNEY 4688-4688 V773 1: C MAGISTRATE 999-999 V1296 2: C MAGISTRATE 1614-1614 V1819 3: C MAGISTRATE 2229-2229 V2342 4: C MAGISTRATE 2844-2844 V2865 5: C MAGISTRATE 3459-3459 V3388 6: C MAGISTRATE 4074-4074 V3911 7: C MAGISTRATE 4689-4689 V774 1: C COURT 1000-1000 V1297 2: C COURT 1615-1615 V1820 3: C COURT 2230-2230 V2343 4: C COURT 2845-2845 V2866 5: C COURT 3460-3460 V3389 6: C COURT 4075-4075 V3912 7: C COURT 4690-4690 V775 1: C JUVENILE, PROBATION OR PAROLE OFFICER 1001-1001 V1298 2: C JUVENILE, PROBATION OR PAROLE OFFICER 1616-1616 V1821 3: C JUVENILE, PROBATION OR PAROLE OFFICER 2231-2231 V2344 4: C JUVENILE, PROBATION OR PAROLE OFFICER 2846-2846 V2867 5: C JUVENILE, PROBATION OR PAROLE OFFICER 3461-3461 V3390 6: C JUVENILE, PROBATION OR PAROLE OFFICER 4076-4076 V3913 7: C JUVENILE, PROBATION OR PAROLE OFFICER 4691-4691 V776 1: C OTHER 1002-1002 V1299 2: C OTHER 1617-1617 V1822 3: C OTHER 2232-2232 V2345 4: C OTHER 2847-2847 V2868 5: C OTHER 3462-3462 V3391 6: C OTHER 4077-4077 V3914 7: C OTHER 4692-4692 V777 1: RESIDUE WHICH AUTHORITIES? 1003-1003 V1300 2: RESIDUE WHICH AUTHORITIES? 1618-1618 V1823 3: RESIDUE WHICH AUTHORITIES? 2233-2233 Page 89 V2346 4: RESIDUE WHICH AUTHORITIES? 2848-2848 V2869 5: RESIDUE WHICH AUTHORITIES? 3463-3463 V3392 6: RESIDUE WHICH AUTHORITIES? 4078-4078 V3915 7: RESIDUE WHICH AUTHORITIES? 4693-4693 V778 1: EXPECT POL/CRT/OTH AUTH DO AYTHG FURTHER? 1004-1004 V1301 2: EXPECT POL/CRT/OTH AUTH DO AYTHG FURTHER? 1619-1619 V1824 3: EXPECT POL/CRT/OTH AUTH DO AYTHG FURTHER? 2234-2234 V2347 4: EXPECT POL/CRT/OTH AUTH DO AYTHG FURTHER? 2849-2849 V2870 5: EXPECT POL/CRT/OTH AUTH DO AYTHG FURTHER? 3464-3464 V3393 6: EXPECT POL/CRT/OTH AUTH DO AYTHG FURTHER? 4079-4079 V3916 7: EXPECT POL/CRT/OTH AUTH DO AYTHG FURTHER? 4694-4694 V779 1: WHAT YOU DOING WHEN INCIDENT HAPPENED? 1005-1006 V1302 2: WHAT YOU DOING WHEN INCIDENT HAPPENED? 1620-1621 V1825 3: WHAT YOU DOING WHEN INCIDENT HAPPENED? 2235-2236 V2348 4: WHAT YOU DOING WHEN INCIDENT HAPPENED? 2850-2851 V2871 5: WHAT YOU DOING WHEN INCIDENT HAPPENED? 3465-3466 V3394 6: WHAT YOU DOING WHEN INCIDENT HAPPENED? 4080-4081 V3917 7: WHAT YOU DOING WHEN INCIDENT HAPPENED? 4695-4696 V780 1: YOU HAVE A JOB AT TIME OF THE INCIDENT? 1007-1007 V1303 2: YOU HAVE A JOB AT TIME OF THE INCIDENT? 1622-1622 V1826 3: YOU HAVE A JOB AT TIME OF THE INCIDENT? 2237-2237 V2349 4: YOU HAVE A JOB AT TIME OF THE INCIDENT? 2852-2852 V2872 5: YOU HAVE A JOB AT TIME OF THE INCIDENT? 3467-3467 V3395 6: YOU HAVE A JOB AT TIME OF THE INCIDENT? 4082-4082 V3918 7: YOU HAVE A JOB AT TIME OF THE INCIDENT? 4697-4697 V781 1: MAJOR ACTIVITY THE WEEK OF THE INCIDENT? 1008-1008 V1304 2: MAJOR ACTIVITY THE WEEK OF THE INCIDENT? 1623-1623 V1827 3: MAJOR ACTIVITY THE WEEK OF THE INCIDENT? 2238-2238 V2350 4: MAJOR ACTIVITY THE WEEK OF THE INCIDENT? 2853-2853 V2873 5: MAJOR ACTIVITY THE WEEK OF THE INCIDENT? 3468-3468 V3396 6: MAJOR ACTIVITY THE WEEK OF THE INCIDENT? 4083-4083 V3919 7: MAJOR ACTIVITY THE WEEK OF THE INCIDENT? 4698-4698 V782 1: YOUR JOB AT TIME OF THE INCIDENT? 1009-1010 V1305 2: YOUR JOB AT TIME OF THE INCIDENT? 1624-1625 V1828 3: YOUR JOB AT TIME OF THE INCIDENT? 2239-2240 V2351 4: YOUR JOB AT TIME OF THE INCIDENT? 2854-2855 V2874 5: YOUR JOB AT TIME OF THE INCIDENT? 3469-3470 V3397 6: YOUR JOB AT TIME OF THE INCIDENT? 4084-4085 V3920 7: YOUR JOB AT TIME OF THE INCIDENT? 4699-4700 V783 1: WAS YOUR JOB WITH -1011-1011 V1306 2: WAS YOUR JOB WITH -1626-1626 V1829 3: WAS YOUR JOB WITH -2241-2241 V2352 4: WAS YOUR JOB WITH -2856-2856 V2875 5: WAS YOUR JOB WITH -3471-3471 V3398 6: WAS YOUR JOB WITH -4086-4086 V3921 7: WAS YOUR JOB WITH -4701-4701 V784 1: AT THIS JOB, DID YOU WORK MOSTLY IN -1012-1012 V1307 2: AT THIS JOB, DID YOU WORK MOSTLY IN -1627-1627 V1830 3: AT THIS JOB, DID YOU WORK MOSTLY IN -2242-2242 V2353 4: AT THIS JOB, DID YOU WORK MOSTLY IN -2857-2857 V2876 5: AT THIS JOB, DID YOU WORK MOSTLY IN -3472-3472 V3399 6: AT THIS JOB, DID YOU WORK MOSTLY IN -4087-4087 V3922 7: AT THIS JOB, DID YOU WORK MOSTLY IN -4702-4702 Page 90 V785 1: DID INCIDENT HAPPEN AT YOUR WORK SITE? 1013-1013 V1308 2: DID INCIDENT HAPPEN AT YOUR WORK SITE? 1628-1628 V1831 3: DID INCIDENT HAPPEN AT YOUR WORK SITE? 2243-2243 V2354 4: DID INCIDENT HAPPEN AT YOUR WORK SITE? 2858-2858 V2877 5: DID INCIDENT HAPPEN AT YOUR WORK SITE? 3473-3473 V3400 6: DID INCIDENT HAPPEN AT YOUR WORK SITE? 4088-4088 V3923 7: DID INCIDENT HAPPEN AT YOUR WORK SITE? 4703-4703 V786 1: DID YOU USUALLY WORK DAYS OR NIGHTS? 1014-1014 V1309 2: DID YOU USUALLY WORK DAYS OR NIGHTS? 1629-1629 V1832 3: DID YOU USUALLY WORK DAYS OR NIGHTS? 2244-2244 V2355 4: DID YOU USUALLY WORK DAYS OR NIGHTS? 2859-2859 V2878 5: DID YOU USUALLY WORK DAYS OR NIGHTS? 3474-3474 V3401 6: DID YOU USUALLY WORK DAYS OR NIGHTS? 4089-4089 V3924 7: DID YOU USUALLY WORK DAYS OR NIGHTS? 4704-4704 V787 1: LOSE TIME FROM WORK BECAUSE OF INJURIES? 1015-1015 V1310 2: LOSE TIME FROM WORK BECAUSE OF INJURIES? 1630-1630 V1833 3: LOSE TIME FROM WORK BECAUSE OF INJURIES? 2245-2245 V2356 4: LOSE TIME FROM WORK BECAUSE OF INJURIES? 2860-2860 V2879 5: LOSE TIME FROM WORK BECAUSE OF INJURIES? 3475-3475 V3402 6: LOSE TIME FROM WORK BECAUSE OF INJURIES? 4090-4090 V3925 7: LOSE TIME FROM WORK BECAUSE OF INJURIES? 4705-4705 V788 1: # OF DAYS LOST BECAUSE OF INJURIES? 1016-1018 V1311 2: # OF DAYS LOST BECAUSE OF INJURIES? 1631-1633 V1834 3: # OF DAYS LOST BECAUSE OF INJURIES? 2246-2248 V2357 4: # OF DAYS LOST BECAUSE OF INJURIES? 2861-2863 V2880 5: # OF DAYS LOST BECAUSE OF INJURIES? 3476-3478 V3403 6: # OF DAYS LOST BECAUSE OF INJURIES? 4091-4093 V3926 7: # OF DAYS LOST BECAUSE OF INJURIES? 4706-4708 V789 1: DID YOU LOSE PAY THAT WAS NOT COVERED? 1019-1019 V1312 2: DID YOU LOSE PAY THAT WAS NOT COVERED? 1634-1634 V1835 3: DID YOU LOSE PAY THAT WAS NOT COVERED? 2249-2249 V2358 4: DID YOU LOSE PAY THAT WAS NOT COVERED? 2864-2864 V2881 5: DID YOU LOSE PAY THAT WAS NOT COVERED? 3479-3479 V3404 6: DID YOU LOSE PAY THAT WAS NOT COVERED? 4094-4094 V3927 7: DID YOU LOSE PAY THAT WAS NOT COVERED? 4709-4709 V790 1: ABOUT HOW MUCH PAY DID YOU LOSE? 1020-1024 V1313 2: ABOUT HOW MUCH PAY DID YOU LOSE? 1635-1639 V1836 3: ABOUT HOW MUCH PAY DID YOU LOSE? 2250-2254 V2359 4: ABOUT HOW MUCH PAY DID YOU LOSE? 2865-2869 V2882 5: ABOUT HOW MUCH PAY DID YOU LOSE? 3480-3484 V3405 6: ABOUT HOW MUCH PAY DID YOU LOSE? 4095-4099 V3928 7: ABOUT HOW MUCH PAY DID YOU LOSE? 4710-4714 V791 1: LI OTHER TIME LOST FROM WORK (NOT INJURY) 1025-1025 V1314 2: LI OTHER TIME LOST FROM WORK (NOT INJURY) 1640-1640 V1837 3: LI OTHER TIME LOST FROM WORK (NOT INJURY) 2255-2255 V2360 4: LI OTHER TIME LOST FROM WORK (NOT INJURY) 2870-2870 V2883 5: LI OTHER TIME LOST FROM WORK (NOT INJURY) 3485-3485 V3406 6: LI OTHER TIME LOST FROM WORK (NOT INJURY) 4100-4100 V3929 7: LI OTHER TIME LOST FROM WORK (NOT INJURY) 4715-4715 V792 1: C POLICE RELATED ACTIVITIES 1026-1026 V1315 2: C POLICE RELATED ACTIVITIES 1641-1641 V1838 3: C POLICE RELATED ACTIVITIES 2256-2256 V2361 4: C POLICE RELATED ACTIVITIES 2871-2871 V2884 5: C POLICE RELATED ACTIVITIES 3486-3486 Page 91 V3407 6: C POLICE RELATED ACTIVITIES 4101-4101 V3930 7: C POLICE RELATED ACTIVITIES 4716-4716 V793 1: C COURT RELATED ACTIVITIES 1027-1027 V1316 2: C COURT RELATED ACTIVITIES 1642-1642 V1839 3: C COURT RELATED ACTIVITIES 2257-2257 V2362 4: C COURT RELATED ACTIVITIES 2872-2872 V2885 5: C COURT RELATED ACTIVITIES 3487-3487 V3408 6: C COURT RELATED ACTIVITIES 4102-4102 V3931 7: C COURT RELATED ACTIVITIES 4717-4717 V794 1: C REPAIRING DAMAGED PROPERTY 1028-1028 V1317 2: C REPAIRING DAMAGED PROPERTY 1643-1643 V1840 3: C REPAIRING DAMAGED PROPERTY 2258-2258 V2363 4: C REPAIRING DAMAGED PROPERTY 2873-2873 V2886 5: C REPAIRING DAMAGED PROPERTY 3488-3488 V3409 6: C REPAIRING DAMAGED PROPERTY 4103-4103 V3932 7: C REPAIRING DAMAGED PROPERTY 4718-4718 V795 1: C REPLACING STOLEN ITEMS 1029-1029 V1318 2: C REPLACING STOLEN ITEMS 1644-1644 V1841 3: C REPLACING STOLEN ITEMS 2259-2259 V2364 4: C REPLACING STOLEN ITEMS 2874-2874 V2887 5: C REPLACING STOLEN ITEMS 3489-3489 V3410 6: C REPLACING STOLEN ITEMS 4104-4104 V3933 7: C REPLACING STOLEN ITEMS 4719-4719 V796 1: C OTHER 1030-1030 V1319 2: C OTHER 1645-1645 V1842 3: C OTHER 2260-2260 V2365 4: C OTHER 2875-2875 V2888 5: C OTHER 3490-3490 V3411 6: C OTHER 4105-4105 V3934 7: C OTHER 4720-4720 V797 1: C DIDN'T LOSE WORK TIME FOR THESE REASONS 1031-1031 V1320 2: C DIDN'T LOSE WORK TIME FOR THESE REASONS 1646-1646 V1843 3: C DIDN'T LOSE WORK TIME FOR THESE REASONS 2261-2261 V2366 4: C DIDN'T LOSE WORK TIME FOR THESE REASONS 2876-2876 V2889 5: C DIDN'T LOSE WORK TIME FOR THESE REASONS 3491-3491 V3412 6: C DIDN'T LOSE WORK TIME FOR THESE REASONS 4106-4106 V3935 7: C DIDN'T LOSE WORK TIME FOR THESE REASONS 4721-4721 V798 1: RESIDUE TIME LOST FROM WORK (NOT INJURY) 1032-1032 V1321 2: RESIDUE TIME LOST FROM WORK (NOT INJURY) 1647-1647 V1844 3: RESIDUE TIME LOST FROM WORK (NOT INJURY) 2262-2262 V2367 4: RESIDUE TIME LOST FROM WORK (NOT INJURY) 2877-2877 V2890 5: RESIDUE TIME LOST FROM WORK (NOT INJURY) 3492-3492 V3413 6: RESIDUE TIME LOST FROM WORK (NOT INJURY) 4107-4107 V3936 7: RESIDUE TIME LOST FROM WORK (NOT INJURY) 4722-4722 V799 1: # OF WORK DAYS LOST (EXCLUDE INJURY)? 1033-1035 V1322 2: # OF WORK DAYS LOST (EXCLUDE INJURY)? 1648-1650 V1845 3: # OF WORK DAYS LOST (EXCLUDE INJURY)? 2263-2265 V2368 4: # OF WORK DAYS LOST (EXCLUDE INJURY)? 2878-2880 V2891 5: # OF WORK DAYS LOST (EXCLUDE INJURY)? 3493-3495 V3414 6: # OF WORK DAYS LOST (EXCLUDE INJURY)? 4108-4110 V3937 7: # OF WORK DAYS LOST (EXCLUDE INJURY)? 4723-4725 V800 1: DID YOU LOSE PAY THAT WAS NOT COVERED? 1036-1036 V1323 2: DID YOU LOSE PAY THAT WAS NOT COVERED? 1651-1651 V1846 3: DID YOU LOSE PAY THAT WAS NOT COVERED? 2266-2266 Page 92 V2369 4: DID YOU LOSE PAY THAT WAS NOT COVERED? 2881-2881 V2892 5: DID YOU LOSE PAY THAT WAS NOT COVERED? 3496-3496 V3415 6: DID YOU LOSE PAY THAT WAS NOT COVERED? 4111-4111 V3938 7: DID YOU LOSE PAY THAT WAS NOT COVERED? 4726-4726 V801 1: ABOUT HOW MUCH PAY DID YOU LOSE? 1037-1041 V1324 2: ABOUT HOW MUCH PAY DID YOU LOSE? 1652-1656 V1847 3: ABOUT HOW MUCH PAY DID YOU LOSE? 2267-2271 V2370 4: ABOUT HOW MUCH PAY DID YOU LOSE? 2882-2886 V2893 5: ABOUT HOW MUCH PAY DID YOU LOSE? 3497-3501 V3416 6: ABOUT HOW MUCH PAY DID YOU LOSE? 4112-4116 V3939 7: ABOUT HOW MUCH PAY DID YOU LOSE? 4727-4731 V802 1: OTHER HH MEMBERS 16YRS+ LOSE WORK TIME? 1042-1042 V1325 2: OTHER HH MEMBERS 16YRS+ LOSE WORK TIME? 1657-1657 V1848 3: OTHER HH MEMBERS 16YRS+ LOSE WORK TIME? 2272-2272 V2371 4: OTHER HH MEMBERS 16YRS+ LOSE WORK TIME? 2887-2887 V2894 5: OTHER HH MEMBERS 16YRS+ LOSE WORK TIME? 3502-3502 V3417 6: OTHER HH MEMBERS 16YRS+ LOSE WORK TIME? 4117-4117 V3940 7: OTHER HH MEMBERS 16YRS+ LOSE WORK TIME? 4732-4732 V803 1: HOW MANY DAYS DID THEY LOSE ALTOGETHER? 1043-1045 V1326 2: HOW MANY DAYS DID THEY LOSE ALTOGETHER? 1658-1660 V1849 3: HOW MANY DAYS DID THEY LOSE ALTOGETHER? 2273-2275 V2372 4: HOW MANY DAYS DID THEY LOSE ALTOGETHER? 2888-2890 V2895 5: HOW MANY DAYS DID THEY LOSE ALTOGETHER? 3503-3505 V3418 6: HOW MANY DAYS DID THEY LOSE ALTOGETHER? 4118-4120 V3941 7: HOW MANY DAYS DID THEY LOSE ALTOGETHER? 4733-4735 V804 1: WHAT TRANSPORTATION WERE YOU USING? 1046-1047 V1327 2: WHAT TRANSPORTATION WERE YOU USING? 1661-1662 V1850 3: WHAT TRANSPORTATION WERE YOU USING? 2276-2277 V2373 4: WHAT TRANSPORTATION WERE YOU USING? 2891-2892 V2896 5: WHAT TRANSPORTATION WERE YOU USING? 3506-3507 V3419 6: WHAT TRANSPORTATION WERE YOU USING? 4121-4122 V3942 7: WHAT TRANSPORTATION WERE YOU USING? 4736-4737 V805 1: NO. TIMES OF SIMILAR INCID-LAST 6 MONTHS? 1048-1050 V1328 2: NO. TIMES OF SIMILAR INCID-LAST 6 MONTHS? 1663-1665 V1851 3: NO. TIMES OF SIMILAR INCID-LAST 6 MONTHS? 2278-2280 V2374 4: NO. TIMES OF SIMILAR INCID-LAST 6 MONTHS? 2893-2895 V2897 5: NO. TIMES OF SIMILAR INCID-LAST 6 MONTHS? 3508-3510 V3420 6: NO. TIMES OF SIMILAR INCID-LAST 6 MONTHS? 4123-4125 V3943 7: NO. TIMES OF SIMILAR INCID-LAST 6 MONTHS? 4738-4740 V806 1: REASON FOR NOT KNOWING NO. OF TIMES 1051-1051 V1329 2: REASON FOR NOT KNOWING NO. OF TIMES 1666-1666 V1852 3: REASON FOR NOT KNOWING NO. OF TIMES 2281-2281 V2375 4: REASON FOR NOT KNOWING NO. OF TIMES 2896-2896 V2898 5: REASON FOR NOT KNOWING NO. OF TIMES 3511-3511 V3421 6: REASON FOR NOT KNOWING NO. OF TIMES 4126-4126 V3944 7: REASON FOR NOT KNOWING NO. OF TIMES 4741-4741 V807 1: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 1 1052-1053 V1330 2: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 1 1667-1668 V1853 3: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 1 2282-2283 V2376 4: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 1 2897-2898 V2899 5: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 1 3512-3513 V3422 6: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 1 4127-4128 V3945 7: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 1 4742-4743 Page 93 V808 1: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 2 1054-1055 V1331 2: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 2 1669-1670 V1854 3: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 2 2284-2285 V2377 4: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 2 2899-2900 V2900 5: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 2 3514-3515 V3423 6: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 2 4129-4130 V3946 7: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 2 4744-4745 V809 1: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 3 1056-1057 V1332 2: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 3 1671-1672 V1855 3: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 3 2286-2287 V2378 4: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 3 2901-2902 V2901 5: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 3 3516-3517 V3424 6: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 3 4131-4132 V3947 7: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 3 4746-4747 V810 1: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 4 1058-1059 V1333 2: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 4 1673-1674 V1856 3: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 4 2288-2289 V2379 4: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 4 2903-2904 V2902 5: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 4 3518-3519 V3425 6: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 4 4133-4134 V3948 7: NUMBER OF INCIDENTS IN QUARTER 4 4748-4749 V811 1: ALL/SOME/NONE INCIDENTS OCCUR SAME PLACE? 1060-1060 V1334 2: ALL/SOME/NONE INCIDENTS OCCUR SAME PLACE? 1675-1675 V1857 3: ALL/SOME/NONE INCIDENTS OCCUR SAME PLACE? 2290-2290 V2380 4: ALL/SOME/NONE INCIDENTS OCCUR SAME PLACE? 2905-2905 V2903 5: ALL/SOME/NONE INCIDENTS OCCUR SAME PLACE? 3520-3520 V3426 6: ALL/SOME/NONE INCIDENTS OCCUR SAME PLACE? 4135-4135 V3949 7: ALL/SOME/NONE INCIDENTS OCCUR SAME PLACE? 4750-4750 V812 1: ALL/SOME/NONE INCIDENTS BY SAME PERSON? 1061-1061 V1335 2: ALL/SOME/NONE INCIDENTS BY SAME PERSON? 1676-1676 V1858 3: ALL/SOME/NONE INCIDENTS BY SAME PERSON? 2291-2291 V2381 4: ALL/SOME/NONE INCIDENTS BY SAME PERSON? 2906-2906 V2904 5: ALL/SOME/NONE INCIDENTS BY SAME PERSON? 3521-3521 V3427 6: ALL/SOME/NONE INCIDENTS BY SAME PERSON? 4136-4136 V3950 7: ALL/SOME/NONE INCIDENTS BY SAME PERSON? 4751-4751 V813 1: LI OFFENDER(S) RELATIONSHIP(S) TO YOU? 1062-1062 V1336 2: LI OFFENDER(S) RELATIONSHIP(S) TO YOU? 1677-1677 V1859 3: LI OFFENDER(S) RELATIONSHIP(S) TO YOU? 2292-2292 V2382 4: LI OFFENDER(S) RELATIONSHIP(S) TO YOU? 2907-2907 V2905 5: LI OFFENDER(S) RELATIONSHIP(S) TO YOU? 3522-3522 V3428 6: LI OFFENDER(S) RELATIONSHIP(S) TO YOU? 4137-4137 V3951 7: LI OFFENDER(S) RELATIONSHIP(S) TO YOU? 4752-4752 V814 1: C SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 1063-1063 V1337 2: C SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 1678-1678 V1860 3: C SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 2293-2293 V2383 4: C SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 2908-2908 V2906 5: C SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 3523-3523 V3429 6: C SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 4138-4138 V3952 7: C SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 4753-4753 V815 1: C EX-SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 1064-1064 V1338 2: C EX-SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 1679-1679 V1861 3: C EX-SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 2294-2294 V2384 4: C EX-SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 2909-2909 V2907 5: C EX-SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 3524-3524 Page 94 V3430 6: C EX-SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 4139-4139 V3953 7: C EX-SPOUSE AT TIME OF INCIDENT 4754-4754 V816 1: C PARENT OR STEP-PARENT 1065-1065 V1339 2: C PARENT OR STEP-PARENT 1680-1680 V1862 3: C PARENT OR STEP-PARENT 2295-2295 V2385 4: C PARENT OR STEP-PARENT 2910-2910 V2908 5: C PARENT OR STEP-PARENT 3525-3525 V3431 6: C PARENT OR STEP-PARENT 4140-4140 V3954 7: C PARENT OR STEP-PARENT 4755-4755 V817 1: C OTHER RELATIVE 1066-1066 V1340 2: C OTHER RELATIVE 1681-1681 V1863 3: C OTHER RELATIVE 2296-2296 V2386 4: C OTHER RELATIVE 2911-2911 V2909 5: C OTHER RELATIVE 3526-3526 V3432 6: C OTHER RELATIVE 4141-4141 V3955 7: C OTHER RELATIVE 4756-4756 V818 1: C FRIEND OR EX-FRIEND 1067-1067 V1341 2: C FRIEND OR EX-FRIEND 1682-1682 V1864 3: C FRIEND OR EX-FRIEND 2297-2297 V2387 4: C FRIEND OR EX-FRIEND 2912-2912 V2910 5: C FRIEND OR EX-FRIEND 3527-3527 V3433 6: C FRIEND OR EX-FRIEND 4142-4142 V3956 7: C FRIEND OR EX-FRIEND 4757-4757 V819 1: C NEIGHBOR 1068-1068 V1342 2: C NEIGHBOR 1683-1683 V1865 3: C NEIGHBOR 2298-2298 V2388 4: C NEIGHBOR 2913-2913 V2911 5: C NEIGHBOR 3528-3528 V3434 6: C NEIGHBOR 4143-4143 V3957 7: C NEIGHBOR 4758-4758 V820 1: C SCHOOLMATE 1069-1069 V1343 2: C SCHOOLMATE 1684-1684 V1866 3: C SCHOOLMATE 2299-2299 V2389 4: C SCHOOLMATE 2914-2914 V2912 5: C SCHOOLMATE 3529-3529 V3435 6: C SCHOOLMATE 4144-4144 V3958 7: C SCHOOLMATE 4759-4759 V821 1: C ROOMMATE, BOARDER 1070-1070 V1344 2: C ROOMMATE, BOARDER 1685-1685 V1867 3: C ROOMMATE, BOARDER 2300-2300 V2390 4: C ROOMMATE, BOARDER 2915-2915 V2913 5: C ROOMMATE, BOARDER 3530-3530 V3436 6: C ROOMMATE, BOARDER 4145-4145 V3959 7: C ROOMMATE, BOARDER 4760-4760 V822 1: C STRANGER 1071-1071 V1345 2: C STRANGER 1686-1686 V1868 3: C STRANGER 2301-2301 V2391 4: C STRANGER 2916-2916 V2914 5: C STRANGER 3531-3531 V3437 6: C STRANGER 4146-4146 V3960 7: C STRANGER 4761-4761 V823 1: C OTHER NONRELATIVE 1072-1072 V1346 2: C OTHER NONRELATIVE 1687-1687 V1869 3: C OTHER NONRELATIVE 2302-2302 Page 95 V2392 4: C OTHER NONRELATIVE 2917-2917 V2915 5: C OTHER NONRELATIVE 3532-3532 V3438 6: C OTHER NONRELATIVE 4147-4147 V3961 7: C OTHER NONRELATIVE 4762-4762 V824 1: RESIDUE OFFENDER RELATIONSHIP(S) TO YOU? 1073-1073 V1347 2: RESIDUE OFFENDER RELATIONSHIP(S) TO YOU? 1688-1688 V1870 3: RESIDUE OFFENDER RELATIONSHIP(S) TO YOU? 2303-2303 V2393 4: RESIDUE OFFENDER RELATIONSHIP(S) TO YOU? 2918-2918 V2916 5: RESIDUE OFFENDER RELATIONSHIP(S) TO YOU? 3533-3533 V3439 6: RESIDUE OFFENDER RELATIONSHIP(S) TO YOU? 4148-4148 V3962 7: RESIDUE OFFENDER RELATIONSHIP(S) TO YOU? 4763-4763 V825 1: DID THE SAME THING HAPPEN EACH TIME? 1074-1074 V1348 2: DID THE SAME THING HAPPEN EACH TIME? 1689-1689 V1871 3: DID THE SAME THING HAPPEN EACH TIME? 2304-2304 V2394 4: DID THE SAME THING HAPPEN EACH TIME? 2919-2919 V2917 5: DID THE SAME THING HAPPEN EACH TIME? 3534-3534 V3440 6: DID THE SAME THING HAPPEN EACH TIME? 4149-4149 V3963 7: DID THE SAME THING HAPPEN EACH TIME? 4764-4764 V826 1: IS THE TROUBLE STILL GOING ON? 1075-1075 V1349 2: IS THE TROUBLE STILL GOING ON? 1690-1690 V1872 3: IS THE TROUBLE STILL GOING ON? 2305-2305 V2395 4: IS THE TROUBLE STILL GOING ON? 2920-2920 V2918 5: IS THE TROUBLE STILL GOING ON? 3535-3535 V3441 6: IS THE TROUBLE STILL GOING ON? 4150-4150 V3964 7: IS THE TROUBLE STILL GOING ON? 4765-4765 V827 1: ONE CAT BEST DESCRIBES SERIES OF CRIMES 1076-1077 V1350 2: ONE CAT BEST DESCRIBES SERIES OF CRIMES 1691-1692 V1873 3: ONE CAT BEST DESCRIBES SERIES OF CRIMES 2306-2307 V2396 4: ONE CAT BEST DESCRIBES SERIES OF CRIMES 2921-2922 V2919 5: ONE CAT BEST DESCRIBES SERIES OF CRIMES 3536-3537 V3442 6: ONE CAT BEST DESCRIBES SERIES OF CRIMES 4151-4152 V3965 7: ONE CAT BEST DESCRIBES SERIES OF CRIMES 4766-4767 V828 1: TYPE OF CRIME CODE (OLD) 1078-1079 V1351 2: TYPE OF CRIME CODE (OLD) 1693-1694 V1874 3: TYPE OF CRIME CODE (OLD) 2308-2309 V2397 4: TYPE OF CRIME CODE (OLD) 2923-2924 V2920 5: TYPE OF CRIME CODE (OLD) 3538-3539 V3443 6: TYPE OF CRIME CODE (OLD) 4153-4154 V3966 7: TYPE OF CRIME CODE (OLD) 4768-4769 V829 1: TYPE OF CRIME CODE (NEW) 1080-1081 V1352 2: TYPE OF CRIME CODE (NEW) 1695-1696 V1875 3: TYPE OF CRIME CODE (NEW) 2310-2311 V2398 4: TYPE OF CRIME CODE (NEW) 2925-2926 V2921 5: TYPE OF CRIME CODE (NEW) 3540-3541 V3444 6: TYPE OF CRIME CODE (NEW) 4155-4156 V3967 7: TYPE OF CRIME CODE (NEW) 4770-4771 V830 1: INCIDENT FLAG 1082-1082 V1353 2: INCIDENT FLAG 1697-1697 V1876 3: INCIDENT FLAG 2312-2312 V2399 4: INCIDENT FLAG 2927-2927 V2922 5: INCIDENT FLAG 3542-3542 V3445 6: INCIDENT FLAG 4157-4157 V3968 7: INCIDENT FLAG 4772-4772 Page 96 V831 1: WAS IT YOUR SCHOOL? 1083-1083 V1354 2: WAS IT YOUR SCHOOL? 1698-1698 V1877 3: WAS IT YOUR SCHOOL? 2313-2313 V2400 4: WAS IT YOUR SCHOOL? 2928-2928 V2923 5: WAS IT YOUR SCHOOL? 3543-3543 V3446 6: WAS IT YOUR SCHOOL? 4158-4158 V3969 7: WAS IT YOUR SCHOOL? 4773-4773 V832 1: PART OF SCHOOL BUILDING? 1084-1084 V1355 2: PART OF SCHOOL BUILDING? 1699-1699 V1878 3: PART OF SCHOOL BUILDING? 2314-2314 V2401 4: PART OF SCHOOL BUILDING? 2929-2929 V2924 5: PART OF SCHOOL BUILDING? 3544-3544 V3447 6: PART OF SCHOOL BUILDING? 4159-4159 V3970 7: PART OF SCHOOL BUILDING? 4774-4774 V833 1: ON INDIAN RESERVATION OR ON INDIAN LANDS? 1085-1085 V1356 2: ON INDIAN RESERVATION OR ON INDIAN LANDS? 1700-1700 V1879 3: ON INDIAN RESERVATION OR ON INDIAN LANDS? 2315-2315 V2402 4: ON INDIAN RESERVATION OR ON INDIAN LANDS? 2930-2930 V2925 5: ON INDIAN RESERVATION OR ON INDIAN LANDS? 3545-3545 V3448 6: ON INDIAN RESERVATION OR ON INDIAN LANDS? 4160-4160 V3971 7: ON INDIAN RESERVATION OR ON INDIAN LANDS? 4775-4775 V834 1: FOUR DIGIT YEAR 1086-1089 V1357 2: FOUR DIGIT YEAR 1701-1704 V1880 3: FOUR DIGIT YEAR 2316-2319 V2403 4: FOUR DIGIT YEAR 2931-2934 V2926 5: FOUR DIGIT YEAR 3546-3549 V3449 6: FOUR DIGIT YEAR 4161-4164 V3972 7: FOUR DIGIT YEAR 4776-4779 V3973 BLANK 4780-4780 Page 97Page 98 DEMOGRAPHIC SURVEYS DIVISION - QUARTERS 1 AND 2, 2001 NATIONAL CRIME VICTIMIZATION SURVEY/SCHOOL CRIME SUPPLEMENT DATA FILE CONTENT AND RECORD LAYOUT PUBLIC USE FILE VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V1 Sample 1 1-2 1-2 Sample Number 20-21 V2 Scrambled 1 3-4 3-4 Scrambled Control Number Control 2 1-4 5-8 Number 3 1-4 9-12 4 1-4 13-16 V3 Household Number 5 1 17 Household Number 1-9 V4 Panel/Rotation 5 2 18 Panel 1-6 5 3 19 Rotation Group 1-6 V5 Year/Quarter 5 4 20 Year 6 1 21 01 Quarter 6 2 22 1-2 V6 2 202 6 3 23 Unit Status 1 Unit in sample the previous enumeration period 2 Unit in sample first time this period 8 Residue V7 3 203 6 4 24 Household Status 1 Same household interviewed the previous enumeration 2 Replacement household since the previous enumeration 3 Noninterview the previous enumeration 4 Other 8 Residue Page 99 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V8 4 204 7 1-2 25-26 Line Number of Household Respondent 01-96 Actual line number 98 Residue V9 5 205 7 3-4 27-28 Special place/group quarters type code 97 Special place/Group quarters 98 Residue 99 Blank or not a special place/group quarters V10 6 206(O) 8 1 29 Tenure (Original) 1 Owned or being bought 2 Rented for cash 3 No cash rent 0, 4-9 Invalid entry V11 6 206(A) 8 2 30 Tenure (Allocated) 1 Owned or being bought 2 Rented for cash 3 No cash rent V12 7 207(O) 8 3 31 Land Use (Original) 1 Urban 2 Rural 0, 3-9 Invalid Entry V13 7 207(A) 8 4 32 Land Use (Allocated) 1 Urban 2 Rural V14 8 208(O) 9 1 33 Farm Sales (Original) 1 $1,000 or more 2 Less than $1,000 7 Item Blank 0,3-6,8-9 Invalid Entry V15 8 208(A) 9 2 34 Farm Sales (Allocated) 1 $1,000 or more 2 Less than $1,000 7 Item Blank Page 100 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V16 9 209(O) 9 3-4 35-36 Type of Living Quarters (Original) Housing Unit 01 House, apartment, flat 02 Housing unit in nontransient hotel, motel, etc. 03 Housing unit permanent in transient hotel, motel, etc. 04 Housing unit in rooming house 05 Mobile home or trailer with no permanent room added 06 Mobile home or trailer with one or more permanent rooms added 07 Housing unit not specified above 9 (cont.) 209(O) (cont.) 9 (cont.) 3-4 (cont.) 35-36 (cont.) Other Unit 08 Quarters not housing unit in rooming or boarding house 09 Unit not permanent in transient hotel, motel, etc. 10 Unoccupied site for mobile home, trailer, or tent 11 Student quarters in college dormitory 12 Other unit not specified above 98 Residue 00,13-99 Invalid Entry Page 101 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V17 9 209(A) 10 1-2 37-38 Type of Living Quarters (Allocated) Housing Unit 01 House, apartment, flat 02 Housing unit in nontransient hotel, motel, etc. 03 Housing unit permanent in transient hotel, motel, etc. 04 Housing unit in rooming house 05 Mobile home or trailer with no permanent room added 9 (cont.) 209(A) (cont.) 10 (cont.) 1-2 (cont.) 37-38 (cont.) 06 Mobile home or trailer with one or more permanent rooms added 07 Housing unit not specified above Other Unit 08 Quarters not housing unit in rooming or boarding house 09 Unit not permanent in transient hotel, motel, etc. 10 Unoccupied site for mobile home, trailer, or tent Other Unit (cont.) 11 Student quarters in college dormitory 12 Other unit not specified above 00,13-99 Invalid Entry Page 102 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V18 10a 210 10 3 39 Location of Phone 1 Phone in unit 2 Phone in common area (hallway, etc.) 3 Phone in another unit (neighbor, friend, etc.) 4 Work/office phone 5 No phone 8 Residue V19 10b 211 10 4 40 Is phone interview acceptable? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Refused to give number 8 Residue V20 11a 212 11 1-2 41-42 Number of housing units in structure 01 One 02 Two 03 Three 04 Four 05 Five-Nine 06 Ten or more 07 Mobile home or trailer 08 Only OTHER units 98 Residue V21 11b 213 11 3 43 Direct outside access 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 7 Item blank 8 Residue Page 103 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V22 12a 214 11 12 4 1 44 45 Household income 01 Less than $5,000 02 $5,000 to $7,499 03 $7,500 to $9,999 04 $10,000 to $12,499 05 $12,500 to $14,999 06 $15,000 to $17,499 07 $17,500 to $19,999 08 $20,000 to $24,999 09 $25,000 to $29,999 10 $30,000 to $34,999 11 $35,000 to $39,999 12 $40,000 to $49,999 13 $50,000 to $74,999 14 $75,000 and over 98 Residue V23 5 215 12 2-3 46-47 Month Noninterview completed (NCVS-7) 99 Blank V24 12 4 48 Day Noninterview completed 13 1 49 99 Blank V25 13 2-3 50-51 Year Noninterview completed 99 Blank V26 6 (NCVS-7) 216 Note: This person based file will contain no Type A, B, or C households and therefore this SC will always have a value of 30, 98, or 99. 13 14 4 1 52 53 Reason for Household Noninterview Interviewed 30 Interviewed household 98 Residue Page 104 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V27 7 (NCVS-7) 217 Note: This person based file will contain no Type A, B, or C households and therefore this SC will always be blank. 14 2 54 Race of household head (Type A) 9 Blank V28 20 403 14 3-4 55-56 Principal Person Information Relationship to reference person 01 Husband 02 Wife 03 Son 04 Daughter 05 Father 06 Mother 07 Brother 08 Sister 09 Other relative 10 Nonrelative 11 Reference person V29 21 404(A) 15 1-2 57-58 Age last birthday (Allocated) 12-90 Age V30 22a 405 15 3 59 Principal Person Information (continued) Marital status THIS survey period 1 Married 2 Widowed 3 Divorced 4 Separated 5 Never married 8 Residue Page 105 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V31 22b 406 15 4 60 Marital status LAST survey period 1 Married 2 Widowed 3 Divorced 4 Separated 5 Never married 6 Not interviewed last survey period 8 Residue V32 23 407(A) 16 1 61 Sex (Allocated) 1 Male 2 Female V33 24 408 16 2 62 Armed Forces member (Is ... now in the Armed Forces?) 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V34 25a 409 16 3-4 63-64 Education (What is the highest grade or year of regular school ... has ever attended?) 00 Never attended or kindergarten 01-08 Elementary 09-12 High school 21-26 College (Academic) 98 Residue V35 25b 410 17 1 65 Principle Person Information (continued) Education (Did ... complete that year?) 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V36 27 412(A) 17 2 66 Race (Allocated) 1 White 2 Black 3 American Indian, Aleut, Eskimo 4 Asian, Pacific Islander Page 106 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V37 28 413 17 3 67 Hispanic origin 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V38 21 404(A) Reference Person Information 17 4 68 Age last birthday (Allocated) 18 1 69 12-90 Age V39 22a 405 18 2 70 Marital status THIS survey period 1 Married 2 Widowed 3 Divorced 4 Separated 5 Never married 8 Residue V40 22b 406 Reference Person Information (continued) 18 3 71 Marital status LAST survey period 1 Married 2 Widowed 3 Divorced 4 Separated 5 Never married 6 Not interviewed last survey period 8 Residue V41 23 407(A) 18 4 72 Sex (Allocated) 1 Male 2 Female V42 24 408 19 1 73 Armed Forces member (Is ... now in the Armed Forces?) 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue Page 107 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V43 25a 409 19 2-3 74-75 Education (What is the highest grade or year of regular school ... has ever attended?) 00 Never attended or kindergarten 01-08 Elementary 09-12 High school 21-26 College (Academic) 98 Residue V44 25b 410 19 4 76 Education (Did ... complete that year?) 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V45 27 412(A) 20 1 77 Reference Person Information (continued) Race (Allocated) 1 White 2 Black 3 American Indian, Aleut, Eskimo 4 Asian, Pacific Islander V46 28 413 20 2 78 Hispanic origin 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V47 13a 301 20 3-4 79-80 Line number of person for whom a proxy interview was obtained (first person) 01-96 Actual line number 98 Residue V48 13b 302 21 1-2 81-82 Line number of proxy respondent (first person) 01-87, 89-96 Actual line number 88 Non-household member as proxy respondent 98 Residue Page 108 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V49 13c 303 21 3 83 Reason for proxy interview (first person) 1 12-13 years old and parent refused permission for self interview 2 Physically/mentally unable to answer 3 Temporarily absent and won't return before closeout 8 Residue V50 13a 304 21 22 4 1 84 85 Line number of person for whom a proxy interview was obtained (second person) 01-96 Actual line number 98 Residue V51 13b 305 22 2-3 86-87 Line number of proxy respondent (second person) 01-87, 89-96 Actual line number 88 Non-household member as proxy respondent 98 Residue V52 13c 306 22 4 88 Reason for proxy interview (second person) 1 12-13 years old and parent refused permission for self interview 2 Physically/mentally unable to answer 3 Temporarily absent and won't return before closeout 8 Residue V53 13a 307 23 1-2 89-90 Line number of person for whom a proxy interview was obtained (third person) 01-96 Actual line number 98 Residue Page 109 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V54 13b 308 23 3-4 91-92 Line number of proxy respondent (third person) 01-87, 89-96 Actual line number 88 Non-household member as proxy respondent 98 Residue V55 13c 309 24 1 93 Reason for proxy interview (third person) 1 12-13 years old and parent refused permission for self interview 2 Physically/mentally unable to answer 3 Temporarily absent and won't return before closeout 8 Residue V56 13a 310 24 2-3 94-95 Line number of person for whom a proxy interview was obtained (fourth person) 01-96 Actual line number 98 Residue V57 13b 311 24 25 4 1 96 97 Line number of proxy respondent (fourth person) 01-87, 89-96 Actual line number 88 Non-household member as proxy respondent 98 Residue Page 110 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V58 13c 312 25 2 98 Reason for proxy interview (fourth person) 1 12-13 years old and parent refused permission for self interview 2 Physically/mentally unable to answer 3 Temporarily absent and won't return before closeout 8 Residue V59 14a 313 25 3-4 99-100 Line number of Type Z Noninterview (first person) 01-96 Actual line number 98 Residue V60 14b 314 26 1 101 Reason for Type Z Noninterview (first person) 1 Never available 2 Refused 3 Physically/mentally unable to answer-no proxy available 4 Temporarily absent and no proxy available 5 Other 6 Office use only 8 Residue V61 14a 315 26 2-3 102-103 Line number of Type Z Noninterview (second person) 01-96 Actual line number 98 Residue Page 111 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V62 14b 316 26 4 104 Reason for Type Z Noninterview (second person) 1 Never available 2 Refused 3 Physically/mentally unable to answer-no proxy available 4 Temporarily absent and no proxy available 5 Other 6 Office use only 8 Residue V63 14a 317 27 1-2 105-106 Line number of Type Z Noninterview (third person) 01-96 Actual line number 98 Residue V64 14b 318 27 3 107 Reason for Type Z Noninterview (third person) 1 Never available 2 Refused 3 Physically/mentally unable to answer-no proxy available 4 Temporarily absent and no proxy available 5 Other 6 Office use only 8 Residue V65 14a 319 27 28 4 1 108 109 Line number of Type Z Noninterview (fourth person) 01-96 Actual line number 98 Residue Page 112 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V66 14b 320 28 2 110 Reason for Type Z Noninterview (fourth person) 1 Never available 2 Refused 3 Physically/mentally unable to answer-no proxy available 4 Temporarily absent and no proxy available 5 Other 6 Office use only 8 Residue V67 15a 321 28 3-4 111-112 Number of household members 12 years of age and over 01-13 Number 98 Residue V68 15b 322 29 1-2 113-114 Number of household members under 12 years of age 00-09 Number 98 Residue V69 15c 323 29 3-4 115-116 Number of crime incident reports filled 00-18 Number 98 Residue V70 34 530 30 1 117 Does anyone in this household operate a business from this address? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V71 35 531 30 2 118 Is there a sign on the premises or some other indication to the general public that a business is operated from this address? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue Page 113 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V72 37b 534 30 3 119 (Other than any incidents already mentioned,) has anyone(a) Broken in or attempted to break into your home by forcing a door or window, pushing past someone, jimmying a lock, cutting a screen, or entering through an open door or window? (b) Has anyone illegally gotten in or tried to get into a garage, shed or storage room? OR 37b (cont.) 534 (cont.) 30 (cont.) 3 (cont.) 119 (cont.) (c) Illegally gotten in or tried to get into a hotel or motel room or vacation home where you were staying? Did any incidents of this type happen to you? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Refused 8 Residue V73 37c 535 30 4 120 How many times? 31 1-2 121-122 000-996 Number 998 Residue Page 114 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V74 38 536 31 3 123 What was the TOTAL number of cars, vans, trucks, motorcycles, or other motor vehicles owned by you or any other member of this household during the last 6 months? Include those you no longer own. 0 None 1 One 2 Two 3 Three 4 Four or more 8 Residue V75 39b 537 31 4 124 During the last 6 months (other than any incidents already mentioned) (was it/were any of them)Stolen or used without permission? Did anyone steal any parts such as a tire, tape deck, hubcap or battery? Did anyone steal gas from (it/them)? OR Did anyone attempt to steal any vehicle or parts attached to (it/them)? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Refused 8 Residue V76 39c 538 32 1-3 125-127 How many times? 000-996 Number 998 Residue Page 115 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V77 46a 557 32 4 128 Now I'd like to ask about vandalism that may have been committed during the last 6 months against your household. Vandalism is the deliberate, intentional damage to or destruction of property. Examples are breaking windows, slashing tires, and painting graffiti on walls. Since (month) (day), 20(year), has anyone intentionally damaged or destroyed property owned by you or someone else in your household? (Exclude any damage done in conjunction with incidents already mentioned.) 1 Yes 2 No 3 Refused 8 Residue V78 46b 558 33 1 129 What kind of property was damaged or destroyed in this/these act(s) of vandalism? Anything else? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-9. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-9. Page 116 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES 46b (cont.) 558 (cont.) NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. Category codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank ------------------------------__ V79 33 2 130 1 Motor vehicle V80 33 3 131 (including parts) V81 33 4 132 2 Bicycle (including V82 34 1 133 parts) V83 34 2 134 3 Mailbox 4 House V84 34 3 135 window/screen/door 5 Yard or garden (trees, V85 34 4 136 shrubs, fence, etc.) V86 35 1 137 6 Furniture, other household goods V87 35 2 138 7 Clothing 8 Animal (pet, livestock, etc.) 9 Other Page 117 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V88 46b 558 (cont.) 35 3 139 Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries V89 46c 559 35 4 140 What kind of damage was done in this/these act(s) of vandalism? Anything else? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-7. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-7. NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. Page 118 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V90 V91 V92 V93 V94 V95 V96 V97 46c (cont.) 559 (cont.) 36 36 36 36 37 37 37 37 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 141 142 143 144 145 146 147 148 Category codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. 1 Broken glass: window, windshield, glass in door, mirror 2 Defaced: marred, graffiti, dirtied 3 Burned: use of fire, heat or explosives 4 Drove into or ran over with vehicle 5 Other breaking or tearing 6 Injured or killed animals 7 Other Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries Page 119 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V98 46d 560 38 1-4 149-152 What was the total dollar amount of 39 1 153 the damage caused by this/these act(s) of vandalism during the last 6 months? (Use repair costs if the property was repaired.) (Exclude any damage done in incidents already mentioned.) 00000 No cost 00001-99996 Actual dollar amount in whole dollars 99997 Don't know 99998 Residue V99 46e 561 39 2 154 Was the damage under $100 or $100 or more? (Include total amount for all incidents of vandalism during the last 6 months.) 1 Under $100 2 $100 or more 3 Don't know 8 Residue V100 Check Item F1 562 39 3 155 In the vandalism just mentioned, were you (was the respondent) attacked or threatened, or was something stolen or an attempt made to steal something that belonged to you (the respondent) or another household member? (Other than any incident(s) already mentioned?) 1 Yes 2 No 3 Refused 8 Residue V101 46f 563 39 4 156 How many times? 40 1-2 157-158 000-996 Number 998 Residue Page 120 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V102 CATI GROUP 40 3 159 CATI Group 1 Non-CATI (includes CATI-eligible but not sent) 2 Completed CATI interview 3 Recycled from a telephone center V103 NCVS HOUSEHOLD WEIGHT 40 41 42 43 4 1-4 1-4 1-3 160 161-164 165-168 169-171 Household Weight This weighting factor is used to tabulate household data. This weighting factor contains five implied decimal places. This weighting factor will contain all zeros for Noninterview households. V104 PSEUDOSTRATUM 43 44 4 1-2 172 173-174 Pseudostratum Code 001-996 Pseudostratum code V105 SECUCODE (NOTE: Also called Half Sample Code) 44 3 175 Standard Error Computation Unit Code 1-2 Secucode V106 12b 218 44 4 176 College/University 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V107 12c 219 45 1 177 Public Housing 1 Yes (public housing) 2 No (not public housing) 7 Item Blank 8 Residue Page 121 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V108 12d 220 45 2 178 Manager Verification of Public Housing Able to verify 1 Public Housing 2 Not public housing Unable to verify 3 CATI/Telephone 4 Other 7 Item Blank 8 Residue V109 FAMILYSTRUCTURE 45 3-4 179-180 Family Structure Codes 01 Male reference person, wife, children, relatives only 02 Male reference person, wife, children, nonrelatives 03 Male reference person, wife, children, relatives and nonrelatives 04 Male reference person, wife, children only 05 Male reference person, wife, relatives only 06 Male reference person, wife, nonrelatives only 07 Male reference person, wife, relatives and non-relatives 08 Male reference person, wife only 09 Lone male reference person, children, relatives only Page 122 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES FAMILYSTRUCTURE (cont.) 45 (cont.) 3-4 (cont.) 179-180 (cont.) 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 Lone male reference person, children, nonrelatives only Lone male reference person, children, relatives and nonrelatives Lone male reference person, children only Lone male reference person, relatives only Lone male reference person, nonrelatives only Lone male reference person, relatives and nonrelatives Lone male reference person only Female reference person, husband, children, relatives only Female reference person, husband, children, nonrelatives only Female reference person, husband, children, relatives and non-relatives Female reference person, husband, children only Female reference person, husband, relatives only Female reference person, husband, nonrelatives only Female reference person, husband, relatives and non-relatives Page 123 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES FAMILYSTRUCTURE (cont.) 45 (cont.) 3-4 (cont.) 179-180 (cont.) 24 Female reference person, husband only 25 Lone female reference person, children, relatives only 26 Lone female reference person, children, nonrelatives only 27 Lone female reference person, children, relatives and nonrelatives 28 Lone female reference person, children only 29 Lone female reference person, relatives only 30 Lone female reference person, nonrelatives only 31 Lone female reference person, relatives and non-relatives 32 Lone female reference person only 33 Other combinations 34 Residue V110 INTV CODE 46 1 181 Household Interview Code 1 Interview V111 INC/CONT 46 2 182 Incoming or Continuing Rotations 1 Incoming 2 Continuing V112 LAND USE 46 3 183 Land Use 1 Urban 2 Rural Page 124 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V113 PLACE SIZE 46 47 4 1 184 185 Place Size Code of Residence 00 Not in a place 13 Under 10,000 16 10,000-49,999 17 50,000-99,999 18 100,000-249,999 19 250,000-499,999 20 500,000-999,999 21 1,000,000-2,499,999 22 2,500,000-4,999,999 23 5,000,000 or more V114 REGION 47 2 186 Region 1 Northeast 2 Midwest 3 South 4 West V115 TYPE SEG 47 3 187 Type of Segment 1 Unit 2 Group Quarters 3 Area 4 Permit V116 1990 MSA/STAT 47 4 188 MSA Status 1 Central city of an (S)MSA 2 In (S)MSA but not in central city 3 Not (S)MSA 8 Residue V117 MONTH A PAN/ROT 48 1-2 189-190 Month Allocated From Panel/Rotation Number 01 January 02 February 03 March 04 April 05 May 06 June V118 YEAR A PAN/ROT 48 3-4 191-192 Year Allocated From Panel/Rotation Number 01 Year 2001 Page 125 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V119 26 PRIN 411 49 1 193 Principle Person Information Note: Beginning July 1999, we renamed SC 411 from Attending College to Attending School and also added category 0, Regular school. Attending school 0 Regular school 1 College/University 2 Trade school 3 Vocational school 4 None of the above 8 Residue V120 26 REF 411 49 2 194 Reference Person Information Note: Beginning July 1999, we renamed SC 411 from Attending College to Attending School and also added category 0, Regular school. Attending school 0 Regular school 1 College/University 2 Trade school 3 Vocational school 4 None of the above 8 Residue V121 16a 324 49 3-4 195-196 First Person's Line Number 01-96 Actual line number 98 Residue Page 126 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V122 16b 325 50 1-2 197-198 First Person's Household Composition Code Entered this period 11 Person turned 12 12 Returned from school or college 13 Returned from institution 14 Entered because of marriage/separation/ divorce 15 Person entered household for reasons other than above Left this period 21 Person died 22 Left for school or college 23 Entered institution 24 Left because of marriage/separation/ divorce 25 Person left household for reasons other than above 98 Residue V123 16a 326 50 3-4 199-200 Second Person's Line Number 01-96 Actual line number 98 Residue Page 127 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V124 16b 327 51 1-2 201-202 Second Person's Household Composition Code Entered this period 11 Person turned 12 12 Returned from school or college 13 Returned from institution 14 Entered because of marriage/separation/ divorce 15 Person entered household for reasons other than above Left this period 21 Person died 22 Left for school or college 23 Entered institution 24 Left because of marriage/separation/ divorce 25 Person left household for reasons other than above 98 Residue V125 16a 328 51 3-4 203-204 Third Person's Line Number 01-96 Actual line number 98 Residue Page 128 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V126 16b 329 52 1-2 205-206 Third Person's Household Composition Code Entered this period 11 Person turned 12 12 Returned from school or college 13 Returned from institution 14 Entered because of marriage/separation/ divorce 15 Person entered household for reasons other than above Left this period 21 Person died 22 Left for school or college 23 Entered institution 24 Left because of marriage/separation/ divorce 25 Person left household for reasons other than above 98 Residue V127 16a 330 52 3-4 207-208 Fourth Person's Line Number 01-96 Actual line number 98 Residue Page 129 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V128 16b 331 53 1-2 209-210 Fourth Person's Household Composition Code Entered this period 11 Person turned 12 12 Returned from school or college 13 Returned from institution 14 Entered because of marriage/separation/ divorce 15 Person entered household for reasons other than above Left this period 21 Person died 22 Left for school or college 23 Entered institution 24 Left because of marriage/separation/ divorce 25 Person left household for reasons other than above 98 Residue V129 12e 221 Note: This SC was added to the NCVS beginning July 1999. 53 3 211 Indian Reservation or Indian Lands (Cover Page of NCVS-1) 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue Page 130 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V130 4 Digit Year 53 54 4 1-3 212 213-215 Four Digit Year 2001 Note: This SC was added beginning July 1999 to address the Year 2000 problem. V131 19 402 54 4 216 Line Number 55 1 217 01-96 Actual Line Number 98 Residue V132 18 401 55 2 218 Type of Interview 1 Personal, Self-respondent 2 Telephone, Self-respondent 3 Personal, Proxy 4 Telephone, Proxy 5 Noninterview 6 Noninterview (created) 8 Residue V133 20 403 55 3-4 219-220 Relationship to reference person 01 Husband 02 Wife 03 Son 04 Daughter 05 Father 06 Mother 07 Brother 08 Sister 09 Other relative 10 Nonrelative 11 Reference person V134 21 404(O) 56 1-2 221-222 Age Last Birthday (Original) 12-18, 25, 45, 90 Actual Age V135 21 404(A) 56 3-4 223-224 Age Last Birthday (Allocated) 12-18 Age Page 131 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V136 22a 405 57 1 225 Marital status THIS survey period 1 Married 2 Widowed 3 Divorced 4 Separated 5 Never married 8 Residue V137 22b 406 57 2 226 Marital status LAST survey period 1 Married 2 Widowed 3 Divorced 4 Separated 5 Never married 6 Not interviewed last survey period 8 Residue V138 23 407(O) 57 3 227 Sex (Original) 1 Male 2 Female 0, 3-9 Invalid Entry V139 23 407(A) 57 4 228 Sex (Allocated) 1 Male 2 Female V140 24 408 58 1 229 Armed Forces member (Is ... now in the Armed Forces?) 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V141 25a 409 58 2-3 230-231 Education (What is the highest grade or year of regular school ... has ever attended?) 00 Never attended or kindergarten 01-08 Elementary 09-12 High school 21-26 College (Academic) 98 Residue V142 25b 410 58 4 232 Education (Did ... complete that year?) 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue Page 132 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V143 27 412(O) 59 1 233 Race (Original) 1 White 2 Black 3 American Indian, Aleut, Eskimo 4 Asian, Pacific Islander 5 Other 0, 6-9 Invalid Entry V144 27 412(A) 59 2 234 Race (Allocated) 1 White 2 Black 3 American Indian, Aleut, Eskimo 4 Asian, Pacific Islander V145 28 413 59 3 235 Hispanic origin 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V146 29 501 59 60 4 1 236 237 Month interview completed 01 January 02 February 03 March 04 April 05 May 06 June V147 60 2-3 238-239 Day interview completed 01-31 Actual day of the month 98 Residue V148 60 61 4 1 240 241 Year interview completed 01 Year 2001 V149 33a 505 61 2-3 242-243 How long have you lived at this address? (months) 01-11 Number of months 98 Residue Page 133 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V150 33a 506 61 62 4 1 244 245 How long have you lived at this address? (years) 01-90 Number of years 98 Residue V151 33b 508 62 2-3 246-247 Altogether, how many times have you moved in the last 5 years, that is, since _________, _____, 20__? 01-96 Number of times 98 Residue Page 134 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V152 36a/ 36b 532 62 4 248 Was something belonging to you stolen, such as-Things that you carry, like luggage, a wallet, purse, briefcase, book-Clothing, jewelry, or calculator-Bicycle or sports equipment-Things in your house-like a TV, stereo, or tools-Things outside your home such as a garden hose or lawn furniture-Things belonging to children in the household-Things from a vehicle, such as a package, groceries, camera, or cassette tapes-OR Did anyone ATTEMPT to steal anything belonging to you? Did any incidents of this type happen to you? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Refused 8 Residue V153 36c 533 63 1-3 249-251 How many times? 000-996 Number of times 998 Residue Page 135 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V154 37a/ 37b 534 63 4 252 (Other than any incidents already mentioned, ) has anyone-Broken in or ATTEMPTED to break into your home by forcing a door or window, pushing past someone, jimmying a lock, cutting a screen, or entering through an open door or window? Has anyone illegally gotten in or tried to get into a garage, shed or storage room? OR Illegally gotten in or tried to get into a hotel or motel room or vacation home where you were staying? Did any incidents of this type happen to you? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Refused 8 Residue V155 37c 535 64 1-3 253-255 How many times? 000-996 Number of times 998 Residue Page 136 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V156 39a/ 39b 537 64 4 256 During the last 6 months (other than any incidents already mentioned) (was it/were any of them) Stolen or used without permission? Did anyone steal any parts such as a tire, tape deck, hubcap or battery? Did anyone steal any gas from (it/them)? OR Did anyone ATTEMPT to steal any vehicle or parts attached to (it/them)? Did any incidents of this type happen to you? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Refused 8 Residue V157 39c 538 65 1-3 257-259 How many times? 000-996 Number of times 998 Residue Page 137 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V158 40a/ 40b 539 65 4 260 (Other than any incidents already mentioned,) since _____ ___, 20__, were you attacked or threatened OR did you have something stolen from you-At home including the porch or yard-At or near a friend's, relative's, or neighbor's home-At work or school-In places such as a storage shed or laundry room, a shopping mall, restaurant, bank, or airport-While riding in any vehicle-On the street or in a parking lot-At such places as a party, theater, gym, picnic area, bowling lanes, or while fishing or hunting-OR Did anyone ATTEMPT to attack or ATTEMPT to steal anything belonging to you from any of these places? 40a/ 40b (cont.) 539 (cont.) 65 (cont.) 4 (cont.) 260 (cont.) Did any incidents of this type happen to you? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Refused 8 Residue V159 40c 540 66 1-3 261-263 How many times? 000-996 Number of times 998 Residue Page 138 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V160 41a/ 41b 541 66 4 264 (Other than any incidents already mentioned,) has anyone attacked or threatened you in any of these ways-With any weapon, for instance, a gun or knife-With anything like a baseball bat, frying pan, scissors, or stick-By something thrown, such as a rock or bottle-Include any grabbing, punching, or choking, Any rape, attempted rape, or other type of sexual attack-Any face to face threats-OR Any attack or threat or use of force by anyone at all? Please mention it even if you are not certain it was a crime. 41a/ 41b (cont.) 541 (cont.) 66 (cont.) 4 (cont.) 264 (cont.) Did any incidents of this type happen to you? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Refused 8 Residue V161 41c 542 67 1-3 265-267 How many times? 000-996 Number of times 998 Residue Page 139 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V162 42a/ 42b 543 67 4 268 People often don't think of incidents committed by someone they know. (Other than any incidents already mentioned,) did you have something stolen from you or were you attacked or threatened by-Someone at work or school-A neighbor or friend-A relative or family member-Any other person you've met or known? Did any incidents of this type happen to you? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Refused 8 Residue V163 42c 544 68 1-3 269-271 How many times? 000-996 Number of times 998 Residue V164 43a/ 43b 545 68 4 272 Incidents involving forced or unwanted sexual acts are often difficult to talk about. (Other than any incidents already mentioned), have you been forced or coerced to engage in unwanted sexual activity by-Someone you didn't know before-A casual acquaintance-OR Someone you know well? Did any incidents of this type happen to you? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Refused 8 Residue Page 140 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V165 43c 546 69 1-3 273-275 How many times? 000-996 Number of times 998 Residue V166 44a 547 69 4 276 Did you call the police during the last 6 months to report something (else) that happened to you which you thought was a crime? (Other than any incidents already mentioned.) 1 Yes 2 No 3 Refused 8 Residue Page 141 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V167 44a 548 70 1-2 277-278 First Incident 11 Rape 12 Attempted rape 13 Robbery 14 Attempted robbery 15 Assault 16 Attempted assault (Threatened Assault) 17 Burglary 18 Attempted burglary 19 Larceny (Household or Personal) 20 Attempted Larceny (Household or Personal) 21 Motor Vehicle Theft 22 Attempted Motor Vehicle Theft 23 Motor vehicle accident 24 Vandalism (Against Household or Household Member's Property) 25 Prowlers/Peeping Toms 26 Crime Against Household Other Than Any of the Above 27 Not a Crime 28 Crime Against V168 70 3-4 279-280 Someone Else or Society 29 Unable to Classify V169 71 1-2 281-282 98 Residue Second Incident Same codes as First Incident Third Incident Same codes as First Incident Page 142 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V170 Check Item B 549 71 3 283 Were you (was the respondent) attacked or threatened or was something stolen or an attempt made to steal something that belonged to you (the respondent) or another household member? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Refused 8 Residue V171 44b 550 71 4 284 How many times? 72 1-2 285-286 000-996 Number of times 998 Residue V172 45a 551 72 3 287 Did anything happen to you during the last 6 months which you thought was a crime, but did not report to the police? (Other than any incidents already mentioned.) 1 Yes 2 No 3 Refused 8 Residue V173 45a 552 72 4 288 First Incident 73 1 289 11 Rape 12 Attempted rape 13 Robbery 14 Attempted robbery 15 Assault 16 Attempted assault (Threatened Assault) 17 Burglary 18 Attempted burglary 19 Larceny (Household or Personal) 20 Attempted Larceny (Household or Personal) Page 143 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES 45a (cont.) 552 (cont.) 21 Motor Vehicle Theft 22 Attempted Motor Vehicle Theft 23 Motor vehicle accident 24 Vandalism (Against Household or Household Member's Property) 25 Prowlers/Peeping Toms 26 Crime Against Household Other Than Any of the Above 27 Not a Crime 28 Crime Against Someone Else or V174 73 2-3 290-291 Society 29 Unable to Classify 98 Residue V175 73 4 292 74 1 293 Second Incident Same codes as First Incident Third Incident Same codes as First Incident V176 Check Item C 553 74 2 294 Were you (was the respondent) attacked or threatened or was something stolen or an attempt made to steal something that belonged to you (the respondent) or another household member? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Refused 8 Residue V177 45b 554 74 75 3-4 1 295-296 297 How many times? 000-996 Number of times 998 Residue Page 144 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V178 Check Item D 555 75 2 298 Who besides the respondent was present when screen questions were asked? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-8. 7 Indicates "Personal Interview NA". The category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8 for this case. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-8. Category codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. Page 145 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V179 Check 555 75 3 299 1 Telephone interview V180 Item D (cont.) (cont.) 75 4 300 2 No one besides respondent present V181 76 1 301 3 Respondent's spouse V182 76 2 302 4 Household member(s) 12+, not spouse V183 76 3 303 5 Household member(s) under 12 V184 76 4 304 6 Nonhousehold V185 77 1 305 member(s) 7 Someone was present V186 77 2 306 - can't say who 8 Don't know if someone else was V187 77 3 307 present Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries V188 Check Item E 556 77 4 308 Did the person for whom this interview was taken help the proxy respondent answer any screen questions? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Person for whom interview taken not present 8 Residue 9 Blank - Self-response V189 47a 576 78 1 309 Did you have a job or work at a business last week? (Do not include volunteer work or work around the house.) 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue Page 146 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V190 47b 577 78 2 310 Did you have a job or work at a business during the last 6 months? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V191 47c 578 78 3 311 Did that (job/work) last 2 consecutive weeks or more? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V192 48a 579 78 79 4 1 312 313 Which of the following best describes your job? Medical Profession - As a 01 Physician 02 Nurse 03 Technician 04 Other Mental Health Services Field Are your duties 05 Professional (Social worker/psychiatrist) 06 Custodial care 07 Other Teaching Profession - Were you employed in a 08 Preschool 09 Elementary 10 Junior high or middle school 11 High School 12 College or university 13 Technical or industrial school Page 147 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES 48a (cont.) 579 (cont.) 78 79 (cont.) 4 1 (cont.) 312 313 (cont.) 14 Special education facility 15 Other Law Enforcement or Security Field - Were you employed as a 16 Law enforcement officer 17 Prison or jail guard 18 Security guard 19 Other Retail Sales - Were you employed as a 20 Convenience or liquor store clerk 21 Gas station attendant 22 Bartender 23 Other Transportation Field - Were you employed as a 24 Bus driver 25 Taxi cab driver 26 Other OR 27 Something Else 98 Residue V193 48b 580 79 2 314 Is your job with 1 A private company, business, or individual for wages 2 The Federal government 3 A State, county, or local government 4 Yourself, (Self-employed) in your own business, professional practice, or farm 8 Residue Page 148 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V194 48d 582 79 3 315 While working at your job, do you work mostly in 1 A city 2 Suburban area 3 Rural area 4 Combination of any of these 8 Residue V195 HR FLAG 79 4 316 Household Respondent 0 Not household respondent 1 Household respondent V196 48c 581 80 1 317 Are you employed by a college or university? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V197 26 411 Note: Beginning July 1999, we renamed SC 411 from Attending College to Attending School and also added category 0, Regular school. 80 2 318 Attending college 0 Regular school 1 College/University 2 Trade school 3 Vocational school 4 Not at all 8 Residue Page 149 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V198 SCS 80 3-4 319-320 SCS Person Weight PERSON 81 1-4 321-324 WEIGHT 82 1-4 325-328 This weighting factor to be used when (CONTINUI NG) 83 1-2 329-330 restricting analysis to continuing rotations only. This weighting factor contains five implied decimal places. Use this when analyzing NCVS crime data. This weighting factor will contain all zeros for Noninterview persons. V199 # OF INCIDENT S 83 3-4 331-332 Number of crime incident reports filled for the household 00-07 Number 98 Residue V200 4 Digit Year Note: This SC was added beginning July 1999 to address the Year 2000 problem. 84 1-4 333-336 Four Digit Year 2001 V201 PERNUM 85 1-2 337-338 Person number (within a household) 01-06 V202 NUMPER 85 3-4 339-340 The total number of persons in the household. 01-06 V203 NUMINC 86 1-2 341-342 The total number of incidents for that person. 01-07 V204 1STOCCHL D 86 3 343 First occurrence of this household 1- First occurrence 0- Subsequent occurrence Page 150 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V205 1STOCCPER 86 4 344 First occurrence of a person within this household This field is always 1. Begin SCS Data: V206 002 87 1-2 345-346 Respondent Line No. 01-96 98 Residue V207 003 87 3-4 347-348 Respondent Age 12-18 Age 98 Residue V208 004 88 1 349 Type of SCS Interview 1 Personal - Self 2 Telephone - Self 3 Personal - Proxy 4 Telephone - Proxy 5 Noninterview 6 Noninterview created 7 Interview - Type unknown V209 005 88 2 350 Reason for SCS Noninterview 1 Type Z Noninterview on NCVS 2 Refused 3 Not available 4 Physically or mentally unable and no proxy available 5 Unknown reason V210 1a 006 88 3 351 Did you attend school at any time during the last 6 months, that is, any time since______ 1st? 1 Yes 2 No V211 1b 092 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 88 4 352 During that time, were you ever home-schooled? That is, did you receive ANY of that schooling at home, rather than in a public or private school? 1 Yes 2 No Page 151 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V212 1c 007 89 1 353 Was ALL or SOME of that home schooling? 1 All 2 Some V213 2a 093 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 89 2-3 354-355 During the last 6 months, that is, any time since ______1st, if you were in a public or private school, what grade would you be in? 00 Fifth or under 01 Sixth 02 Seventh 03 Eighth 04 Ninth 05 Tenth 06 Eleventh 07 Twelfth 08 Other 09 College/GED/Postgraduate/Other noneligible 98 Residue 99 Blank (SCS Noninterview) V214 2b 008 89 90 4 1 356 357 During the last 6 months, that is, any time since ______1st, what grade were you in school? 00 Fifth or under 01 Sixth 02 Seventh 03 Eighth 04 Ninth 05 Tenth 06 Eleventh 07 Twelfth 08 Other 09 College/GED/Postgraduate/Other noneligible 98 Residue 99 Blank (SCS Noninterview) Page 152 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V215 3 009 90 2 358 In what month did your current school year begin? 1 August 2 September 3 Other 8 Residue V216 4 010 90 3 359 Did you attend school for all of the last 6 months? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V217 5 011 90 4 360 How many months were you in school during the last 6 months? 1 One month 2 Two months 3 Three months 4 Four months 5 Five months 8 Residue V218 7a 016 91 1 361 Is your school public or private? 1 Public 2 Private 8 Residue V219 7b 017 91 2 362 Is this your regularly assigned school or a school that you or your family chose? 1 Assigned 2 Chosen 3 Assigned school is school of choice 8 Residue V220 7c 018 91 3 363 Is your school church-related? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 8 Residue V221 7d 019 91 4 364 Is your school Catholic? 1 Yes, Catholic 2 No, other religion 8 Residue Page 153 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V222 8 020 92 1-2 365-366 What grades are taught in your school? (Lowest) 00 Pre-K or Kindergarten 01-11 Actual grades taught 12 H.S. Senior 13 Post-graduate 20 All ungraded 30 All Special Education 98 Residue V223 8 021 92 3-4 367-368 What grades are taught in your school? (Highest) 00 Pre-K or Kindergarten 01-11 Actual grades taught 12 H.S. Senior 13 Post-graduate 20 All ungraded 30 All Special Education 98 Residue V224 9 022 93 1 369 How do you get to school most of the time? 1 Walk 2 School bus 3 Public bus, subway, train 4 Car 5 Bicycle, motorbike, or motorcycle 6 Some other way 8 Residue V225 10 023 93 2 370 How long does it take you to get from your home to school most of the time? 1 Less than 15 minutes 2 15 - 29 minutes 3 30 - 44 minutes 4 45 - 59 minutes 5 60 minutes or longer 8 Residue Page 154 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V226 11 024 93 3 371 How do you get home from school most of the time? 1 Walk 2 School bus 3 Public bus, subway, train 4 Car 5 Bicycle, motorbike, or motorcycle 6 Some other way 8 Residue V227 12a 025 93 4 372 Are most students at your school allowed to leave the school grounds to eat lunch? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 8 Residue V228 12b 026 94 1 373 How often do you leave school grounds at lunch time? 1 Never 2 Once or twice a year 3 Once or twice a month 4 Once or twice a week 5 Almost every day 8 Residue V229 13 027 94 2 374 During the last 6 months, have you participated in any extra-curricular activities sponsored by your school? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue Page 155 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V230 14a 028 94 3 375 Does your school take any measures to ensure the safety of students? For example, does the school have: a. Security guards and/or assigned police officers? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 8 Residue V231 14b 029 94 4 376 b. Other school staff or other adults supervising the hallway? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 8 Residue V232 14c 030 95 1 377 c. Metal detectors? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 8 Residue V233 14d 031 95 2 378 d. Locked entrance or exit doors during the day? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 8 Residue V234 14e 032 95 3 379 e. A requirement that visitors sign in? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 8 Residue V235 14f 033 95 4 380 f. Locker checks? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 8 Residue Page 156 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V236 14g 094 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 96 1 381 g. A requirement that students wear badges or picture identification? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 8 Residue V237 14h 095 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 96 2 382 h. One or more security cameras to monitor the school? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 8 Residue V238 14i 096 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 96 3 383 i. A code of student conduct, that is, a set of written rules or guidelines that the school provides you? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 8 Residue V239 15a 034 96 4 384 I am going to read a list of statements that could describe a school. Thinking about your school over the last 6 months, would you strongly agree, agree, disagree, or strongly disagree with the following. a. Everyone knows what the school rules are.. 1 Strongly Agree 2 Agree 3 Disagree 4 Strongly Disagree 8 Residue V240 15b 035 97 1 385 b. The school rules are fair.. 1 Strongly Agree 2 Agree 3 Disagree 4 Strongly Disagree 8 Residue Page 157 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V241 15c 036 97 2 386 c. The punishment for breaking school rules is the same no matter who you are.. 1 Strongly Agree 2 Agree 3 Disagree 4 Strongly Disagree 8 Residue V242 15d 037 97 3 387 d. The school rules are strictly enforced.. 1 Strongly Agree 2 Agree 3 Disagree 4 Strongly Disagree 8 Residue V243 15e 038 97 4 388 e. If a school rule is broken, students know what kind of punishment will follow.. 1 Strongly Agree 2 Agree 3 Disagree 4 Strongly Disagree 8 Residue V244 16 039 98 1 389 During the last 6 months, that is, since ____ 1st , have you attended any drug education classes in your school? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 8 Residue Page 158 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V245 17a.a. 040 98 2 390 The following question refers to the availability of drugs and alcohol at your school. Tell me if you don't know what any of these items are. Is it possible to get __________ at your school? a. Alcoholic beverages.. 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 4 Don't know drug 8 Residue V246 17a.b. 041 98 3 391 b. Marijuana.. 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 4 Don't know drug 8 Residue V247 17a.c. 042 98 4 392 c. Crack.. 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 4 Don't know drug 8 Residue V248 17a.d. 043 99 1 393 d. Other forms of cocaine.. 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 4 Don't know drug 8 Residue V249 17a.e. 097 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 99 2 394 e. Uppers such as ecstasy, crystal meth, or other illegal stimulants.. 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 4 Don’t know drug 8 Residue Page 159 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V250 17a.f. 098 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 99 3 395 f. Downers such as GHB or sleeping pills.. 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 4 Don’t know drug 8 Residue V251 17a.g. 045 99 4 396 g. LSD or acid.. 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 4 Don't know drug 8 Residue V252 17a.h. 046 100 1 397 h. PCP or angel dust .. 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 4 Don't know drug 8 Residue V253 17a.i. 047 100 2 398 i. Heroin or smack .. 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 4 Don't know drug 8 Residue V254 17a.j. 048 100 3 399 j. Other illegal drugs1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 4 Don't know drug 8 Residue V255 17b.a. 049 100 4 400 Would you say ---------- (is/are) easy, fairly easy, fairly hard, or hard to get at your school? a. Alcoholic beverages.. 1 Easy 2 Fairly Easy 3 Fairly Hard 4 Hard 5 NA 8 Residue Page 160 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V256 17b.b. 050 101 1 401 b. Marijuana.. 1 Easy 2 Fairly Easy 3 Fairly Hard 4 Hard 5 NA 8 Residue V257 17b.c. 051 101 2 402 c. Crack.. 1 Easy 2 Fairly Easy 3 Fairly Hard 4 Hard 5 NA 8 Residue V258 17b.d. 052 101 3 403 d. Other forms of cocaine.. 1 Easy 2 Fairly Easy 3 Fairly Hard 4 Hard 5 NA 8 Residue V259 17b.e. 099 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 101 4 404 e. Uppers such as ecstasy, crystal meth, or other illegal stimulants.. 1 Easy 2 Fairly Easy 3 Fairly Hard 4 Hard 5 NA 8 Residue V260 17b.f. 100 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 102 1 405 f. Downers such as GHB or sleeping pills.. 1 Easy 2 Fairly Easy 3 Fairly Hard 4 Hard 5 NA 8 Residue Page 161 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V261 17b.g. 054 102 2 406 g. LSD or acid .. 1 Easy 2 Fairly Easy 3 Fairly Hard 4 Hard 5 NA 8 Residue V262 17b.h. 055 102 3 407 h. PCP or angel dust .. 1 Easy 2 Fairly Easy 3 Fairly Hard 4 Hard 5 NA 8 Residue V263 17b.i. 056 102 4 408 i. Heroin or smack .. 1 Easy 2 Fairly Easy 3 Fairly Hard 4 Hard 5 NA 8 Residue V264 17b.j. 057 103 1 409 j. Other illegal drugs.. 1 Easy 2 Fairly Easy 3 Fairly Hard 4 Hard 5 NA 8 Residue V265 17c 101 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 103 2 410 During the last 6 months, did you know for sure that any students were on drugs or alcohol while they were at school? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V266 17d 102 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 103 3 411 During the last 6 months, did anyone offer, or try to sell or give you an illegal drug other than alcohol or tobacco at your school? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue Page 162 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V267 18a 103 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 103 4 412 During the last 6 months, have you been in one or more physical fights at school? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V268 18b 104 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 104 1-3 413-415 During the last 6 months, how many times have you been in a physical fight at school? 001-996 Number of times 998 Residue V269 19 067 104 4 416 During the last 6 months, have you been bullied at school? That is, has anyone picked on you a lot or tried to make you do things you didn't want to do like give them money? (You may include incidents you reported before?) 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V270 20a 105 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 105 1 417 During the last 6 months, have you often felt rejected by other students at school? For example, have you felt rejected because other students have made fun or you, called you names, or excluded you from activities? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue Page 163 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V271 20b 106 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 105 2 418 During the last 6 months, how often have you been made fun of, called names, or excluded from activities? 1 Once or twice in the last 6 months 2 Once or twice a month 3 Once or twice a week, or 4 Almost every day 8 Residue V272 21a 065 105 3 419 During the last 6 months, has anyone called you a derogatory or bad name at school having to do with your race, religion, ethnic background or national origin, disability, gender, or sexual orientation? We call these hate-related words. 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V273 21b.a. 107 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 105 4 420 Were any or the hate-related words related to ..... a. Your race? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 8 Residue V274 21b.b. 108 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 106 1 421 b. Your religion? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 8 Residue Page 164 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V275 21b.c. 109 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 106 2 422 c. Your ethnic background or national origin (for example people of Hispanic origin)? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 8 Residue V276 21b.d. 110 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 106 3 423 d. Any disability (by this I mean physical, mental, or developmental disabilities) you may have? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 8 Residue V277 21b.e. 111 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 106 4 424 e. Your gender? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 8 Residue V278 21b.f. 112 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 107 1 425 f. Your sexual orientation? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 8 Residue V279 22 066 107 2 426 During the last 6 months, have you seen any hate-related words or symbols written in school classrooms, school bathrooms, school hallways, or on the outside of your school building? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue Page 165 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V280 23a.a. 068 107 3 427 During the last 6 months, that is, since ______1st, did you STAY AWAY from any of the following places because you thought someone might attack or threaten to attack you there? a. The shortest route to school? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V281 23a.b. 069 107 4 428 b. The entrance into the school? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V282 23a.c. 070 108 1 429 c. Any hallways or stairs in school? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V283 23a.d. 071 108 2 430 d. Parts of the school cafeteria? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V284 23a.e. 072 108 3 431 e. Any school restrooms? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V285 23a.f. 073 108 4 432 f. Other places inside the school building? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V286 23a.g. 074 109 1 433 g. School parking lot? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V287 23a.h. 075 109 2 434 h. Other places on school grounds? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue Page 166 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V288 23b 076 109 3 435 Did you AVOID any extra-curricular activities at your school because you thought someone might attack or threaten to attack you? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V289 23c 077 109 4 436 Did you AVOID any classes because you thought someone might attack or threaten to attack you? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V290 23d 078 110 1 437 Did you stay home from school because you thought someone might attack or threaten to attack you at school, or going to or from school? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V291 24 079 110 2 438 How often are you afraid that someone will attack or threaten to attack you at school? 1 Never 2 Almost never 3 Sometimes 4 Most of the time 8 Residue V292 25 080 110 3 439 How often are you afraid that someone will attack or threaten to attack you on the way to and from school? 1 Never 2 Almost never 3 Sometimes 4 Most of the time 8 Residue Page 167 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V293 26 081 110 4 440 Besides the times you are at school, or going to or from school, how often are you afraid that someone will attack or threaten to attack you? 1 Never 2 Almost never 3 Sometimes 4 Most of the time 8 Residue V294 27a 082 111 1 441 Some people bring guns, knives or objects that can be used as weapons to school for protection. During the last 6 months, that is, since ___1st, did you ever bring a gun to school or onto school grounds? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V295 27b 083 111 2 442 During the last 6 months, did you ever bring a knife to school or onto school grounds? Include only knives brought as weapons? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V296 27c 084 111 3 443 During the last 6 months, did you ever bring some other weapon to school or onto school grounds? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V297 28a 085 111 4 444 Do you know any (other) students who have brought a gun to your school in the last 6 months? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue Page 168 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V298 28b 086 112 1 445 Have you actually seen another student with a gun at school in the last 6 months? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 8 Residue V299 29 113 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 112 2 446 During the last 6 months, could you have gotten a loaded gun without adult supervision, either at school or away from school? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue V300 30 058 112 3 447 Are there any gangs at your school? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 8 Residue V301 31 089 112 4 448 During the last 6 months, that is, since ____ 1st, how often have gangs been involved in fights, attacks or other violence at your school? 1 Never 2 Once or twice in the last 6 months 3 Once or twice a month 4 Once or twice a week, or 5 Almost every day 6 Don't know 8 Residue V302 32 090 113 1 449 Have gangs been involved in the sale of drugs at your school in the last 6 months? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 8 Residue Page 169 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V303 33a 114 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 113 2 450 During the last 4 weeks, did you skip any classes? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 8 Residue V304 33b 115 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 113 3-4 451-452 During the last 4 weeks, on how many days did you skip at least one class? 01-20 Number of days 98 Residue V305 34 116 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 114 1 453 During this school year, across all subjects have you gotten mostly - 1 A’s 2 B’s 3 C’s 4 D’s 5 F’s 6 School does not give grades/no alphabetic grade equivalent 8 Residue V306 35a 117 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 114 2 454 Thinking about the future, do you think you will ... a. Attend school after high school? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 8 Residue Page 170 VARIABLE ITEM SOURCE CODE WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM & CODES V307 35b 118 Note: This source code was added to the SCS in 2001. 114 3 455 Thinking about the future, do you think you will ... b. Graduate from a 4-year college? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 8 Residue V308 Check Item A 091 114 4 456 Was an adult member of the household or family present during at least part of these questions? 1 Personal interview No adult present 2 Personal interview Adult present 3 Telephone interview No adult present 4 Telephone interview Adult present 5 Telephone interview Don't know 8 Residue V309 SCS PERSON WEIGHT (Incoming and Continuing) 115 116 117 1-4 1-4 1-4 457-460 461-464 465-468 SCS Person Weight This weighting factor to be used when analysis includes both the incoming and continuing rotations. This weighting factor contains five implied decimal places. Use this when analyzing SCS crime data. This weighting factor will contain all zeros for Noninterview SCS persons. V310 INCSTART 118 1-3 469-471 The first incident for each person record will begin in character 475. V311 INCLEN 118 119 4 1-2 472 473-474 Each incident record is 615 characters in length. Page 171 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V312 1a 601 1 119 3-4 475 -476 Line Number of Respondent 01-96 Actual line number 98 Residue2 273 2-3 1090 -1091 3 427 1-2 1705 -1706 4 580 581 4 1 2320 2321 5 734 3-4 2935 -2936 6 888 2-3 3550 -3551 7 1042 1-2 4165 -4166 V313 1b 602 1 120 1-2 477 -478 Screen Question Number (Number of screen question in which the incident was reported) 36, 40-45 Individual screen questions 37,39,46 Household screen questions 98 Residue 2 273 274 4 1 1092 1093 3 427 3-4 1707 -1708 4 581 2-3 2322 -2323 5 735 1-2 2937 -2938 6 888 889 4 1 3552 3553 7 1042 3-4 4167 -4168 V314 1c 603 1 120 3-4 479 -480 Incident Number 01-18 Number 98 Residue2 274 2-3 1094 -1095 3 428 1-2 1709 -1710 4 581 582 4 1 2324 2325 5 735 3-4 2939 -2940 6 889 2-3 3554 -3555 7 1043 1-2 4169 -4170 Page 172 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V315 2 605 1 121 1 481 Did (this/the first) incident happen while you were living here or before you moved to this address 1 While living at this address 2 Before moving to this address 8 Residue 2 274 4 1096 3 428 3 1711 4 582 2 2326 5 736 1 2941 6 889 4 3556 7 1043 3 4171 V316V317 3 606 1 121 122 2-4 1 482 485 -484 In what month did (this/the first) incident happen? 01 January 02 February 03 March 04 April 05 May 06 June 07 July 08 August 09 September 10 October 11 November 12 December In what year did (this/the first) incident happen? 00 in 2000 01 in 2001 98 Residue Note: A 98 in positions 3-4 of SC 606 signify residue, whereas a ‘99' signifies a blank. 2 275 1-4 1097 -1100 3 428 429 4 1-3 1712 1713 -1715 4 582 583 3-4 1-2 2327 2329 --2328 2330 5 736 737 2-4 1 2942 2945 -2944 6 890 1-4 3557 -3560 7 1043 1044 4 1-3 4172 4173 -4175 Page 173 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V318 4 607 1 122 2-4 486 -488 Altogether, how many times did this type of incident happen during the last 6 months? 001-996 Actual number of times 997 Don't know 998 Residue 2 276 1-3 1101 -1103 3 429 430 4 1-2 1716 1717 -1718 4 583 584 3-4 1 2331 2333 -2332 5 737 2-4 2946 -2948 6 891 1-3 3561 -3563 7 1044 1045 4 1-2 4176 4177 -4178 V319 Check Item B 608 1 123 1 489 How many incidents? 1 1-5 incidents (not a "series") 2 6 or more incidents 8 Residue 2 276 4 1104 3 430 3 1719 4 584 2 2334 5 738 1 2949 6 891 4 3564 7 1045 3 4179 V320 Check Item C 609 1 123 2 490 Are these incidents similar to each other in detail, or are they for different types of crimes? 1 Similar 2 Different (not a "series") 8 Residue 2 277 1 1105 3 430 4 1720 4 584 3 2335 5 738 2 2950 Page 174 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 6 892 1 3565 7 1045 4 4180 V321 Check Item D 610 1 123 3 491 Can you (respondent) recall enough details of each incident to distinguish them from each other? 1 Yes (not a "series") 2 No (is a "series") 8 Residue 2 277 2 1106 3 431 1 1721 4 584 4 2336 5 738 3 2951 6 892 2 3566 7 1046 1 4181 V322 6 612 1 123 124 4 1 492 493 About what time did (this/the most recent) incident happen? During Day 01 After 6 a.m.-12 noon 02 After 12 noon-3 p.m. 03 After 3 p.m.- 6 p.m. 04 Don't know what time of day At night 05 After 6 p.m.-9 p.m. 06 After 9 p.m.- 12 midnight 07 After 12 midnight - 6 a.m. 08 Don't know what time of night OR 09 Don't know whether day or night 98 Residue 2 277 3-4 1107 -1108 3 431 2-3 1722 -1723 4 585 1-2 2337 -2338 5 738 739 4 1 2952 2953 6 892 3-4 3567 -3568 7 1046 2-3 4182 -4183 Page 175 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V323 7 613 1 124 2 494 In what city, town, or village did this incident occur? 1 Outside U.S. 2 Not inside a city/town/village 3 Same city/town/village as present residence 4 Different city/town/village from present residence 5 Don't know 6 Don't know if 2, 4, or 5 8 Residue 2 278 1 1109 3 431 4 1724 4 585 3 2339 5 739 2 2954 6 893 1 3569 7 1046 4 4184 V324 8b 615 1 124 3 495 Is this the same county and state as your present residence? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue 2 278 2 1110 3 432 1 1725 4 585 4 2340 5 739 3 2955 6 893 2 3570 7 1047 1 4185 Page 176 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V325 10 616 1 124 125 4 1 496 497 IN RESPONDENT'S HOME OR LODGING 01 In own dwelling, own attached garage, or enclosed porch (Include illegal entry or attempted illegal entry of same) 02 In detached building on own property, such as detached garage, storage shed, etc. (Include illegal entry or attempted illegal entry of the same) 03 In vacation home/second home (Include illegal entry or attempted illegal entry of same) 04 In hotel or motel room respondent was staying in (Include illegal entry or attempted illegal entry of same) 2 278 3-4 1111 -1112 3 432 2-3 1726 -1727 4 586 1-2 2341 -2342 5 739 740 4 1 2956 2957 6 893 3-4 3571 -3572 7 1047 2-3 4186 -4187 Page 177 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 10 (cont.) 616 (cont.) NEAR OWN HOME 05 Own yard, sidewalk, driveway, carport, unenclosed porch (does not include apartment yards) 06 Apartment hall, storage area, laundry room (does not include apartment parking lot/garage) 07 On street immediately adjacent to own home AT, IN, OR NEAR A FRIEND'S/RELATIVE'S/ NEIGHBOR'S HOME 08 At or in home or other building on their property 09 Yard, sidewalk, driveway, carport (does not include apartment yards) 10 Apartment hall, storage area, laundry room (does not include apartment parking lot/garage) 11 On street immediately adjacent to their home Page 178 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 10 (cont.) 616 (cont.) COMMERCIAL PLACES 12 Inside restaurant, bar, nightclub 13 Inside other commercial building such as store, bank, gas station 14 Inside office, factory, or warehouse PARKING LOTS/GARAGES 15 Commercial parking lot/garage 16 Noncommercial parking lot/garage 17 Apartment/townhouse parking lot/garage SCHOOL 18 Inside school building 19 On school property (school parking area, play area, school bus, etc. OPEN AREAS, ON STREET OR PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION 20 In apartment yard, park, field, playground (other than school) 21 On the street (other than immediately adjacent to own/friend's/relative's /neighbor's home) Page 179 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 10 (cont.) 616 (cont.) 22 On public transportation or in station (bus, train, plane, airport, depot, etc.) OTHER 23 Other- specify V326 11 617 1 125 2 498 Did the offender live (here/there) or have a right to be (here/there), for instance, as a guest or a repair person? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 4 Don't know if 2 or 3 8 Residue 2 279 1 1113 3 432 4 1728 4 586 3 2343 5 740 2 2958 6 894 1 3573 7 1047 4 4188 V327 12 618 1 125 3 499 Did the offender actually get inside your (house/apartment/room/ garage/shed/enclosed porch)? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 4 Don't know if 2 or 3 8 Residue 2 279 2 1114 3 433 1 1729 4 587 4 2344 5 740 3 2959 6 894 2 3574 7 1048 1 4189 V328 13 619 1 125 4 500 Did the offender try to get in your (house/apartment/room/garage/ shed/enclosed porch)? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 8 Residue 2 279 3 1115 3 433 2 1730 4 588 1 2345 5 740 4 2960 6 894 3 3575 7 1048 2 4190 Page 180 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V329 14 620 126 1 501 Was there any evidence, such as a broken lock or broken window, that the offender(s) (got in by force/tried to get in by force)? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue 279 4 1116 433 3 1731 588 2 2346 741 1 2961 894 4 3576 1048 3 4191 Page 181 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V330 V331V339 15 625-626 Lead-in locations What was the evidence? Anything else? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-9. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-9. NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. Category codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. _____________ 1 126 2 502 2 280 1 1117 3 433 4 1732 4 587 3 2347 5 741 2 2962 6 895 1 3577 7 1048 4 4192 Category code locations 1 126 127 128 3-4 1-4 1-3 503 505 509 ---504 508 511 2 280 281 282 2-4 1-4 1-2 1118 1121 1125 ---1120 1124 1126 3 434 435 436 1-4 1-4 1 1733 1737 1741 --1736 1740 4 587 588 589 4 1-4 1-4 2348 2349 2353 --2352 2356 5 741 742 743 3-4 1-4 1-3 2963 2965 2969 ---2964 2968 2971 Page 182 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V340 15 (cont.) 625-626 (cont.) 6 895 896 897 2-4 1-4 1-2 3578 3581 3585 ---3580 3584 3586 WINDOW 01 Damage to window (include frame, glass broken/removed/cracked ) 02 Screen damaged/removed 03 Lock on window damaged/tampered with in some way 04 Other-specify DOOR 05 Damage to door (include frame, glass panes or door removed) 06 Screen damaged/removed 07 Lock or door handle damaged/tampered with in some way 08 Other-specify OTHER 09 Other than window or door-specify Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 7 1049 1050 1051 1-4 1-4 1 4193 4197 4201 --4196 4200 Residue code locations 1 128 4 512 2 282 3 1127 3 436 2 1742 4 590 1 2357 5 743 4 2972 6 897 3 3587 7 1051 2 4202 Page 183 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V341 16 627 1 129 1-2 513 -514 How did the offender (get in/try to get in)? 01 Let in 02 Offender pushed his/her way in after door opened 03 Through open door or other opening 04 Through unlocked door or window 05 Through locked door or window - Had key 06 Through locked door or window - Picked lock, used credit card, etc., other than key. 07 Through locked door or window - Don't know how 08 Don't know 09 Other 98 Residue 2 282 283 4 1 1128 1129 3 436 3-4 1743 -1744 4 590 2-3 2358 -2359 5 744 1-2 2973 -2974 6 897 898 4 1 3588 3589 7 1051 3-4 4203 -4204 Page 184 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V342 17c 630 1 129 3 515 Did the incident happen in an area restricted to certain people or was it open to the public at the time? 1 Open to the public 2 Restricted to certain people (or nobody had a right to be there) 3 Don't know 4 Other 8 Residue 2 283 2 1130 3 437 1 1745 4 590 4 2360 5 744 3 2975 6 898 2 3590 7 1052 1 4205 V343 18 631 1 129 4 516 Did it happen outdoors, indoors, or both? 1 Indoors (inside a building or enclosed space) 2 Outdoors 3 Both 8 Residue 2 283 3 1131 3 437 2 1746 4 591 1 2361 5 744 4 2976 6 898 3 3591 7 1052 2 4206 V344 19 632 1 130 1 517 How far away from home did this happen? 1 At, in, or near the building containing the respondent's home/next door 2 A mile or less 3 Five miles or less 4 Fifty miles or less 5 More than 50 miles 6 Don't know how far 8 Residue 2 283 4 1132 3 437 3 1747 4 591 2 2362 5 745 1 2977 6 898 4 3592 7 1052 3 4207 Page 185 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V345 20a 634(O) 1 130 2 518 Were you or any other member of this household present when this incident occurred? (Original) 1 Yes 2 No 0, 3-9 Invalid Entry 2 284 1 1133 3 437 4 1748 4 591 3 2363 5 745 2 2978 6 899 1 3593 7 1052 4 4208 V346 20a 634(A) 1 130 3 519 Were you or any other member of this household present when this incident occurred? (Allocated) 1 Yes 2 No 2 284 2 1134 3 438 1 1749 4 591 4 2364 5 745 3 2979 6 899 2 3594 7 1053 1 4209 V347 20b 635(O) 1 130 4 520 Which household members were present? (Original) 1 Respondent only 2 Respondent and other household member(s) 3 Only other household member(s), not respondent 0, 4-9 Invalid Entry 2 284 3 1135 3 438 2 1750 4 592 1 2365 5 745 4 2980 6 899 3 3595 7 1053 2 4210 Page 186 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V348 20b 635(A) 1 131 1 521 Which household members were present? (Allocated) 1 Respondent only 2 Respondent and other household member(s) 3 Only other household member(s), not respondent 6 Don't know if 1 or 2 2 284 4 1136 3 438 3 1751 4 592 2 2366 5 746 1 2981 6 899 4 3596 7 1053 3 4211 V349 21 636 1 131 2 522 Did you personally see an offender? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue 2 285 1 1137 3 438 4 1752 4 592 3 2367 5 746 2 2982 6 900 1 3597 7 1053 4 4212 V350 22 637 1 131 3 523 Did the offender have a weapon such as a gun or knife, or something to use as a weapon, such as a bottle or wrench? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 8 Residue 2 285 2 1138 3 439 1 1753 4 592 4 2368 5 746 3 2983 6 900 2 3598 7 1054 1 4213 Page 187 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V351 V352V358 23 638 Lead-in code locations What was the weapon? Anything else? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-7. 3 Indicates "Yes-Type Weapon-NA". Zeroes will appear in each of the category codes and an 8 will appear in the residue code for this situation. 7 Indicates "Gun Type Unknown". A 1 will always appear in category code 7 and an 8 in the residue position, if there is only an entry in category 7. Otherwise a 0 will appear in the residue code. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-7. ____________ Category codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 1 131 4 524 2 285 3 1139 3 439 2 1754 4 593 1 2369 5 746 4 2984 6 900 3 3599 7 1054 2 4214 Category code locations 1 132 133 1-4 1-3 525 529 --528 531 2 285 286 287 4 1-4 1-2 1140 1141 1145 --1144 1146 3 439 440 441 3-4 1-4 1 1755 1757 1761 --1756 1760 4 593 594 2-4 1-4 2370 2373 --2372 2376 5 747 748 1-4 1-3 2985 2989 --2988 2991 Page 188 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V359 23 (cont.) 638 (cont.) 6 900 901 902 4 1-4 1-2 3600 3601 3605 --3604 3606 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. ___________ 1 Hand gun (pistol, revolver, etc.) 2 Other gun (rifle, shotgun, etc.) 3 Knife 4 Other sharp object (scissors, ice pick, axe, etc.) 5 Blunt object (rock, club, blackjack, etc.) 6 Other 7 Gun Type - Unknown Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 7 1054 1055 1056 3-4 1-4 1 4215 4217 4221 --4216 4220 Residue code locations 1 133 4 532 2 287 3 1147 3 441 2 1762 4 595 1 2377 5 748 4 2992 6 902 3 3607 7 1056 2 4222 Page 189 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V360 24 639(O) 1 134 1 533 Did the offender hit you, knock you down or actually attack you in any way? (Original) 1 Yes 2 No 0, 3-9 Invalid Entry 2 287 4 1148 3 441 3 1763 4 595 2 2378 5 749 1 2993 6 902 4 3608 7 1056 3 4223 V361 24 639(A) 1 134 2 534 Did the offender hit you, knock you down or actually attack you in any way? (Allocated) 1 Yes 2 No 2 288 1 1149 3 441 4 1764 4 595 3 2379 5 749 2 2994 6 903 1 3609 7 1056 4 4224 V362 25 640(O) 1 134 3 535 Did the offender try to attack you? (Original) 1 Yes 2 No 0, 3-9 Invalid Entry 2 288 2 1150 3 442 1 1765 4 595 4 2380 5 749 3 2995 6 903 2 3610 7 1057 1 4225 V363 25 640(A) 1 134 4 536 Did the offender try to attack you? (Allocated) 1 Yes 2 No 2 288 3 1151 3 442 2 1766 4 596 1 2381 Page 190 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 5 749 4 2996 6 903 3 3611 7 1057 2 4226 V364 26 641(O) 1 135 1 537 Did the offender threaten you with harm in any way? (Original) 1 Yes 2 No 0, 3-9 Invalid Entry 2 288 4 1152 3 442 3 1767 4 596 2 2382 5 750 1 2997 6 903 4 3612 7 1057 3 4227 V365 26 641(A) 1 135 2 538 Did the offender threaten you with harm in any way? (Allocated) 1 Yes 2 No 2 289 1 1153 3 442 4 1768 4 596 3 2383 5 750 2 2998 6 904 1 3613 7 1057 4 4228 Page 191 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V366 V367V376 27 642 Lead-in code locations What actually happened? Anything else? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-10. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-10. NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. Category codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. 1 135 3 539 2 289 2 1154 3 443 1 1769 4 596 4 2384 5 750 3 2999 6 904 2 3614 7 1058 1 4229 Category code locations 1 135 136 137 138 4 1-4 1-4 1 540 541 545 549 --544 548 2 289 290 291 2-4 1-4 1-4 1155 1157 1161 ---1156 1160 1164 3 443 444 445 2-4 1-4 1-4 1770 1773 1777 ---1772 1776 1779 4 597 598 599 1-4 1-4 1-2 2385 2389 2393 ---2388 2392 2394 Page 192 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V377 27 (cont.) 642 (cont.) 5 750 751 752 753 4 1-4 1-4 1 3000 3001 3005 3009 --3004 3008 1 Something taken without permission 2 Attempted or threatened to take something 3 Harassed, argument, abusive language 4 Unwanted sexual contact with force (grabbing, fondling, etc.) 5 Unwanted sexual contact without force (grabbing fondling, etc.) 6 Forcible entry or attempted forcible entry of house/apartment 7 Forcible entry or attempted forcible entry of car 8 Damaged or destroyed property 9 Attempted or threatened to damage or destroy property 10 Other Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 6 904 905 906 3-4 1-4 1-4 3615 3617 3621 ---3616 3620 3624 7 1058 1059 1060 2-4 1-4 1-3 4230 4233 4237 ---4232 4236 4239 Residue code locations 1 138 2 550 2 292 1 1165 3 445 4 1780 4 599 3 2395 5 753 2 3010 6 907 1 3625 7 1060 4 4240 Page 193 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V378 V379V392 28a or 28b 643-645 Lead-in code locations How did the offender try to attack you? Any other way? OR How were you threatened? Any other way? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-14. 3 Indicates "Weapon present or threatened with weapon". A 1 will appear in category code 7 for this case. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-14. NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. _________________ Category codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. 1 138 3 551 2 292 2 1166 3 446 1 1781 4 599 4 2396 5 753 3 3011 6 907 2 3626 7 1061 1 4241 Category code locations 1 138 139 140 141 142 4 1-4 1-4 1-4 1 552 553 557 561 565 ---556 560 564 2 292 293 294 295 3-4 1-4 1-4 1-4 1167 1169 1173 1177 ----1168 1172 1176 1180 3 446 447 448 2-4 1-4 1-4 1782 1785 1789 ---1784 1788 1792 Page 194 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 449 1-3 1793 -1795 V393 28a or 28b (cont.) 643-645 (cont.) 4 600 601 602 603 1-4 1-4 1-4 1-2 2397 2401 2405 2409 ----2400 2404 2408 2410 1 Verbal threat of rape 2 Verbal threat to kill 3 Verbal threat of attack 4 Verbal threat of sexual assault other than rape 5 Unwanted sexual contact with force (grabbing, fondling, etc.) 6 Unwanted sexual contact without force (grabbing, fondling, etc.) 7 Weapon present or threatened with weapon 8 Shot at (but missed) 9 Attempted attack with knife/sharp weapon 10 Attempted attack with weapon other than gun/knife/sharp weapon 11 Object thrown at person 12 Followed or surrounded 13 Tried to hit, slap, knock down, grab, hold, trip, jump, push, etc. 14 Other ______________________ Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 5 753 754 755 756 757 4 1-4 1-4 1-4 1 3012 3013 3017 3021 3025 ---3016 3020 3024 6 907 908 909 910 3-4 1-4 1-4 1-4 3627 3629 3633 3637 ----3628 3632 3636 3640 7 1061 1062 1063 1064 2-4 1-4 1-4 1-3 4242 4245 4249 4253 ----4244 4248 4252 4255 Residue code locations 1 142 2 566 2 296 1 1181 3 449 4 1796 4 603 3 2411 5 757 2 3026 6 911 1 3641 7 1064 4 4256 Page 195 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V394 V395V408 29 646-648 Lead-in code locations How were you attacked? Any other way? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-14. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-14. NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. ________________ Category codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. 1 142 3 567 2 296 2 1182 3 450 1 1797 4 603 4 2412 5 757 3 3027 6 911 2 3642 7 1065 1 4257 Category code locations 1 142 143 144 145 146 4 1-4 1-4 1-4 1 568 569 573 577 581 ---572 576 580 2 296 297 298 299 3-4 1-4 1-4 1-4 1183 1185 1189 1193 1195 -----1184 1188 1192 1194 1196 3 450 451 452 453 2-4 1-4 1-4 1-3 1798 1801 1805 1809 ----1800 1804 1808 1811 Page 196 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V409 29 (cont.) 646-648 (cont.) 4 604 605 606 607 1-4 1-4 1-4 1-2 2413 2417 2421 2425 ----2416 2420 2424 2426 1 Raped 2 Tried to rape 3 Sexual assault other than rape or attempted rape 4 Shot 5 Shot at (but missed) 6 Hit with gun held in hand 7 Stabbed/cut with knife/sharp weapon 8 Attempted attack with knife/sharp weapon 9 Hit by object (other than gun) held in hand 10 Hit by thrown object 11 Attempted attack with weapon other than gun/knife/sharp weapon 12 Hit, slapped, knocked down 13 Grabbed, held, tripped, jumped, pushed, etc. 14 Other Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 5 757 758 759 760 761 4 1-4 1-4 1-4 1 3028 3029 3033 3037 3041 ---3032 3036 3040 6 911 912 913 914 3-4 1-4 1-4 1-4 3643 3645 3649 3653 ----3644 3648 3652 3656 7 1065 1066 1067 1068 2-4 1-4 1-4 1-3 4258 4261 4265 4269 ----4260 4264 4268 4271 Residue code location 1 146 2 582 2 300 1 1197 3 453 4 1812 4 607 3 2427 5 761 2 3042 6 915 1 3657 7 1068 4 4272 Page 197 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V410 30 649 1 146 3 583 Did the offender threaten to hurt you before you were actually attacked? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Other 8 Residue 2 300 2 1198 3 454 1 1813 4 607 4 2428 5 761 3 3043 6 915 2 3658 7 1069 1 4273 31 655-656 What were the injuries you suffered, If any? Anything else? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-11. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-11. NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. Page 198 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V411 V412V422 31 (cont.) 655-656 (cont.) Lead-in code locations Category codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. ______________ 1 None 2 Raped 3 Attempted rape 4 Sexual assault other than rape or attempted rape 5 Knife or stab wounds 6 Gun shot, bullet wounds 7 Broken bones or teeth knocked out 8 Internal injuries 9 Knocked unconscious 10 Bruises, black eye, cuts, scratches, swelling, chipped teeth 11 Other 1 146 4 584 2 300 3 1199 3 454 2 1814 4 608 1 2429 5 761 4 3044 6 915 3 3659 7 1069 2 4274 Category code locations 1 147 148 149 1-4 1-4 1-3 585 589 593 ---588 592 595 2 300 301 302 303 4 1-4 1-4 1-2 1200 1201 1205 1209 ---1204 1208 1210 3 454 455 456 457 3-4 1-4 1-4 1 1815 1817 1821 1825 ---1816 1820 1824 Page 199 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V423 31 (cont.) 655-656 (cont.) 4 608 2-4 2430 -2432 Residue codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 609 1-4 2433 -2436 610 1-4 2437 -2440 5 762 1-4 3045 -3048 763 1-4 3049 -3052 764 1-3 3053 -3055 6 915 4 3660 916 1-4 3661 -3664 917 1-4 3665 -3668 918 1-2 3669 -3670 7 1069 3-4 4275 -4276 1070 1-4 4277 -4280 1071 1-4 4281 -4284 1072 1 4285 Residue code locations 1 149 4 596 2 303 3 1211 3 457 2 1826 4 611 1 2441 5 764 4 3056 6 918 3 3671 7 1072 2 4286 V424 32 657 1 150 1 597 Were any of the injuries caused by a weapon other than a gun or knife? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue 2 303 4 1212 3 457 3 1827 Page 200 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 4 611 2 2442 5 765 1 3057 6 918 4 3672 7 1072 3 4287 V425V427 33 658 1 150 151 2-4 1-3 598 601 --600 603 Which injuries were caused by a weapon other than a gun or knife? First Injury 02 Raped 03 Attempted rape 04 Sexual assault other than rape or attempted rape 05 Knife or stab wounds 06 Gun shot, bullet wounds 07 Broken bones or teeth knocked out 08 Internal injuries 09 Knocked unconscious 10 Bruises, black eye, cuts, scratches, swelling, chipped teeth 11 Other 98 Residue 99 Blank or 00 (None) Second Injury Same codes used as listed under First Injury. Third Injury Same codes used as listed under First Injury. 2 304 305 1-4 1-2 1213 1217 --1216 1218 3 457 458 459 4 1-4 1 1828 1829 1833 -1832 4 611 612 3-4 1-4 2443 2445 --2444 2448 5 765 766 2-4 1-3 3058 3061 --3060 3063 6 919 920 1-4 1-2 3673 3677 --3676 3678 33 658 (cont.) 7 1072 4 4288 1073 1-4 4289 -4292 1074 1 4293 Page 201 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V428 34 659 1 151 4 604 Were you injured to the extent that you received any medical care, including self treatment? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue 2 305 3 1219 3 459 2 1834 4 613 1 2449 5 766 4 3064 6 920 3 3679 7 1074 2 4294 35 660 Where did you receive this care? Anywhere else? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-7. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-7. NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. Page 202 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V429 V430V436 35 660 Lead-in code locations Category codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. ______________ 1 At the scene 2 At home/neighbor's/ friend's 3 Health unit at work/school, first aid station at a stadium/park, etc. 4 Doctor's office/health clinic 5 Emergency room at hospital/emergency clinic 6 Hospital (other than emergency room) 7 Other _______________ 1 152 1 605 2 305 4 1220 3 459 3 1835 4 613 2 2450 5 767 1 3065 6 920 4 3680 7 1074 3 4295 Category code locations 1 152 153 2-4 1-4 606 609 --608 612 2 306 307 1-4 1-3 1221 1225 --1224 1227 3 459 460 461 4 1-4 1-2 1836 1837 1841 --1840 1842 4 613 614 615 3-4 1-4 1 2451 2453 2457 --2452 2456 5 767 768 2-4 1-4 3066 3069 --3068 3072 Page 203 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V437 35 (cont.) 660 (cont.) 6 921 922 1-4 1-3 3681 3685 --3684 3687 Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 7 1074 1075 1076 4 1-4 1-2 4296 4297 4301 --4300 4302 Residue code locations 1 154 1 613 2 307 4 1228 3 461 3 1843 4 615 2 2458 5 769 1 3073 6 922 4 3688 7 1076 3 4303 V438 36 662 1 154 2 614 Did you stay overnight in the hospital? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue 2 308 1 1229 3 461 4 1844 4 615 3 2459 5 769 2 3074 6 923 1 3689 7 1076 4 4304 V439 37 663 1 154 155 3-4 1 615 617 -616 How many days did you stay (in the hospital)? 001-200 Actual number of days 998 Residue 2 308 2-4 1230 -1232 3 462 1-3 1845 -1847 4 615 4 2460 Page 204 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 616 1-2 2461 -2462 5 769 770 3-4 1 3075 3077 -3076 6 923 2-4 3690 -3692 7 1077 1-3 4305 -4307 V440 38 664 1 155 2 618 At the time of the incident, were you covered by any medical insurance, or were you eligible for benefits from any other type of health benefits programs, such as Medicaid, Veterans Administration, or Public Welfare? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 8 Residue 2 309 1 1233 3 462 4 1848 4 616 3 2463 5 770 2 3078 6 924 1 3693 7 1077 4 4308 V441 39 665 1 155 156 3-4 1-3 619 621 --620 623 What was the total amount of your medical expenses resulting from this incident (including anything paid by insurance)? Include hospital and doctor bills, medicine, therapy, braces, and any other injury-related expenses. 00000 No Cost 00001-99996 Actual dollar amount in whole dollars 99997 Don't know 99998 Residue 2 309 310 2-4 1-2 1234 1237 --1236 1238 3 463464 1-4 1 1849 1853 -1852 4 616 617 4 1-4 2464 2465 -2468 5 770 771 3-4 1-3 3079 3081 --3080 3083 6 924 925 2-4 1-2 3694 3697 --3696 3698 7 1078 1079 1-4 1 4309 4313 -4312 Page 205 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V442 40 666 1 156 4 624 Did you do anything with the idea of protecting yourself or your property while the incident was going on? 1 Yes 2 No/took no action/kept still 8 Residue 2 310 3 1239 3 464 2 1854 4 618 1 2469 5 771 4 3084 6 925 3 3699 7 1079 2 4314 V443 41 667 1 157 1 625 Was there anything you did or tried to do about the incident while it was going on? 1 Yes 2 No/took no action/kept still 8 Residue 2 310 4 1240 3 464 3 1855 4 618 2 2470 5 772 1 3085 6 925 4 3700 7 1079 3 4315 42 668-671 What did you do? Anything else? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-16. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-16. NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. Page 206 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V444 V445V460 42 668-671 Lead-in code locations Category codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. USED PHYSICAL FORCE TOWARD OFFENDER 1 Attacked offender with gun; fired gun 2 Attacked with other weapon 3 Attacked without weapon (Hit, kicked, etc.) 4 Threatened offender with gun 5 Threatened offender with other weapon 6 Threatened to injure, no weapon RESISTED OR CAPTURED OFFENDER 7 Defended self or property (struggled, ducked, blocked blows, held onto property) 1 157 2 626 2 311 1 1241 3 464 4 1856 4 618 3 2471 5 772 2 3086 6 926 1 3701 7 1079 4 4316 Category code locations 1 157 158 159 160 161 2-4 1-4 1-4 1-4 1-2 627 629 633 637 641 -----628 632 636 640 642 2 311 312 313 314 315 2-4 1-4 1-4 1-4 1 1242 1245 1249 1253 1257 ----1244 1248 1252 1256 3 465 466 467 468 1-4 1-4 1-4 1-4 1857 1861 1865 1869 ----1860 1864 1868 1872 Page 207 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 42 (cont.) 668-671 (cont.) 4 618 619 620 621 622 4 1-4 1-4 1-4 1-3 2472 2473 2477 2481 2485 ----2476 2480 2484 2487 8 Chased, tried to catch or hold offender SCARED OR WARNED OFF OFFENDER 9 Yelled at offender, turned on lights, threatened PERSUADED OR APPEASED OFFENDER5 772 3-4 3087 -3088 773 1-4 3089 -3092 10 Cooperated, or pretended to (stalled, 774 1-4 3093 -3096 did what they asked) 11 Argued, reasoned, 775 1-4 3097 -3100 pleaded, bargained, etc. 776 1-2 3101 -3102 ESCAPED OR GOT AWAY 6 926 2-4 3702 -3704 12 Ran or drove away, or tried; hid, locked door 927 1-4 3705 -3708 GOT HELP OR GAVE ALARM 928 1-4 3709 -3712 13 Called police or guard 14 Tried to attract 929 1-4 3713 -3716 attention or help, warn others (cried out for 930 1 3717 help, called children inside) 7 1080 1-4 4317 -4320 REACTED TO PAIN OR EMOTION 1081 1-4 4321 -4324 15 Screamed from pain or fear 1082 1-4 4325 -4328 OTHER 16 Other - specify 1083 1-4 4329 -4332 _______________ Page 208 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V461 42 (cont.) 668-671 (cont.) Residue code locations Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 1 161 3 643 2 315 2 1258 3 469 1 1873 4 622 4 2488 5 776 3 3103 6 930 2 3718 7 1084 1 4333 43a 672 Did you take these actions(s) before, after, or at the same time that you were injured? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-3. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-3. NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8 Page 209 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V462 V463V465 43a 672 Lead-in code locations Category codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. _______________ 1 Actions taken before injury 2 Actions taken after injury 3 Actions taken at same time as injury ________________ Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 1 161 4 644 2 315 3 1259 3 469 2 1874 4 623 1 2489 5 776 4 3104 6 930 3 3719 7 1084 2 4334 Category code locations 1 162 1-3 645 -647 2 315 316 4 1-2 1260 1261 -1262 3 469 470 3-4 1 1875 1877 -1876 4 623 2-4 2490 -2492 5 777 1-3 3105 -3107 6 930 931 4 1-2 3720 3721 -3722 7 1084 1085 3-4 1 4335 4337 -4336 Page 210 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V466 43a (cont.) 672 (cont.) Residue code locations 1 162 4 648 2 316 3 1263 3 470 2 1878 4 624 1 2493 5 777 4 3108 6 931 3 3723 7 1085 2 4338 V467 43b 673 1 163 1 649 Did (any of) your action(s) help the situation in any way? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 8 Residue 2 316 4 1264 3 470 3 1879 4 624 2 2494 5 778 1 3109 6 931 4 3724 7 1085 3 4339 44 674 How were they helpful? Any other way? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-6. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-6. Page 211 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V468 V469V474 44 (cont.) 674 (cont.) Lead-in code locations NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. Category codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. ______________ 1 Helped avoid injury or greater injury to respondent 2 Scared or chased offender off 3 Helped respondent get away from offender 4 Protected property 5 Protected other people 6 Other _______________ 1 163 2 650 2 317 1 1265 3 470 4 1880 4 624 3 2495 5 778 2 3110 6 932 1 3725 7 1085 4 4340 Category code locations 1 163 164 3-4 1-4 651 653 --652 656 2 317 318 2-4 1-3 1266 1269 --1268 1271 3 471 472 1-4 1-2 1881 1885 --1884 1886 4 624 625 626 4 1-4 1 2496 2497 2501 -2500 5 778 779 3-4 1-4 3111 3113 --3112 3116 6 932 933 2-4 1-3 3726 3729 --3728 3731 7 1086 1087 1-4 1-2 4341 4345 --4344 4346 Page 212 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V475 44 (cont.) 674 (cont.) Residue code locations Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 1 165 1 657 2 318 4 1272 3 472 3 1887 4 626 2 2502 5 780 1 3117 6 933 4 3732 7 1087 3 4347 V476 45 675 1 165 2 658 Did (any of) your action(s) make the situation worse in any way? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 8 Residue 2 319 1 1273 3 472 4 1888 4 626 3 2503 5 780 2 3118 6 934 1 3733 7 1087 4 4348 46 676 How did they make the situation worse? Any other way? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-6. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-6. Page 213 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V477 V478-V483 46 (cont.) 676 (cont.) Lead-in code locations NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. Category codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. 1 Led to injury or greater injury to respondent 2 Caused greater loss of property or damage to property 3 Other people got hurt (worse) 4 Offender got away 5 Made offender angrier, more aggressive, etc. 6 Other - specify ________ 1 165 3 659 2 319 2 1274 3 473 1 1889 4 626 4 2504 5 780 3 3119 6 934 2 3734 7 1088 1 4349 Category code locations 1 165 4 660 166 1-4 661 -664 167 1 665 2 319 3-4 1275 -1276 320 1-4 1277 -1280 3 473 2-4 1890 -1892 474 1-3 1893 -1895 4 627 1-4 2505 -2508 628 1-2 2509 -2510 5 780 4 3120 781 1-4 3121 -3124 782 1 3125 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V477 V478-V483 46 (cont.) 676 (cont.) Lead-in code locations NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. Category codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. 1 Led to injury or greater injury to respondent 2 Caused greater loss of property or damage to property 3 Other people got hurt (worse) 4 Offender got away 5 Made offender angrier, more aggressive, etc. 6 Other - specify ________ 1 165 3 659 2 319 2 1274 3 473 1 1889 4 626 4 2504 5 780 3 3119 6 934 2 3734 7 1088 1 4349 Category code locations 1 165 4 660 166 1-4 661 -664 167 1 665 2 319 3-4 1275 -1276 320 1-4 1277 -1280 3 473 2-4 1890 -1892 474 1-3 1893 -1895 4 627 1-4 2505 -2508 628 1-2 2509 -2510 5 780 4 3120 781 1-4 3121 -3124 782 1 3125 Page 214 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V484 46 (cont.) 676 (cont.) 6 934 935 3-4 1-4 3735 3737 --3736 3740 Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 7 1088 1089 2-4 1-3 4350 4353 --4352 4355 Residue code locations 1 167 2 666 2 321 1 1281 3 474 4 1896 4 628 3 2511 5 782 2 3126 6 936 1 3741 7 1089 4 4356 V485 47 677 1 167 3 667 Was anyone present during the incident besides you and the offender? (Other than children under age 12.) 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 8 Residue 2 321 2 1282 3 475 1 1897 4 628 4 2512 5 782 3 3127 6 936 2 3742 7 1090 1 4357 V486 48 678 1 167 4 668 Did the actions of (this person/any of these people) help the situation in any way? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 8 Residue 2 321 3 1283 3 475 2 1898 4 629 1 2513 5 782 4 3128 6 936 3 3743 7 1090 2 4358 Page 215 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 49 679 How did they help the situation? Any other way? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-6. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-6. NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. Page 216 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V487 V488V493 49 (cont.) 679 (cont.) Lead-in code locations Category codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. _____________ 1 Helped avoid injury or greater injury to respondent 2 Scared or chased offender off 3 Helped respondent get away from offender 4 Protected property 5 Protected other people 6 Other __________ 1 168 1 669 2 321 4 1284 3 475 3 1899 4 629 2 2514 5 783 1 3129 6 936 4 3744 7 1090 3 4359 Category code locations 1 168 169 2-4 1-3 670 673 --672 675 2 322 323 1-4 1-2 1285 1289 --1288 1290 3 475 476 477 4 1-4 1 1900 1901 1905 -1904 4 629 630 3-4 1-4 2515 2517 --2516 2520 5 783 784 2-4 1-3 3130 3133 --3132 3135 Page 217 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V494 49 (cont.) 679 (cont.) 6 937 938 1-4 1-2 3745 3749 --3748 3750 Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 7 1090 1091 1092 4 1-4 1 4360 4361 4365 -4364 Residue code locations 1 169 4 676 2 323 3 1291 3 477 2 1906 4 631 1 2521 5 784 4 3136 6 938 3 3751 7 1092 2 4366 V495 50 680 1 170 1 677 Did the actions of (this person/any of these people) make the situation worse in any way? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 8 Residue 2 323 4 1292 3 477 3 1907 4 631 2 2522 5 785 1 3137 6 938 4 3752 7 1092 3 4367 Page 218 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V496 V497V502 51 681 Lead-in code locations How did they make the situation worse? Any other way? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-6. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-6. NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. Category codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. 1 170 2 678 2 324 1 1293 3 477 4 1908 4 631 3 2523 5 785 2 3138 6 939 1 3753 7 1092 4 4368 Category code locations 1 170 171 3-4 1-4 679 681 --680 684 2 324 325 2-4 1-3 1294 1297 --1296 1299 3 478 479 1-4 1-2 1909 1913 --1912 1914 4 631 632 633 4 1-4 1 2524 2525 2529 -2528 5 785 786 3-4 1-4 3139 3141 --3140 3144 6 939 940 2-4 1-3 3754 3757 --3756 3759 7 1093 1094 1-4 1-2 4369 4373 --4372 4374 Page 219 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V503 51 (cont.) 681 (cont.) Residue code locations 1 Led to injury or greater injury to respondent 2 Caused greater loss of property or damage to property 3 Other people got hurt (worse) 4 Offender got away 5 Made offender angrier, more aggressive, etc. 6 Other Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 1 172 1 685 2 325 4 1300 3 479 3 1915 4 633 2 2530 5 787 1 3145 6 940 4 3760 7 1094 3 4375 V504 52 682 1 172 2 686 Not counting yourself, were any of these persons harmed, threatened with harm, or robbed by force or threat of harm? (Do not include yourself, the offender, or children under 12 years of age.) 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 8 Residue 2 326 1 1301 3 479 4 1916 4 633 3 2531 5 787 2 3146 6 941 1 3761 7 1094 4 4376 Page 220 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V505 53 683(O) 1 172 3-4 687 -688 How many? (Do not include yourself, the offender or children under 12 years of age.) (Original) 01-09 Number of persons 00, 10-96 Invalid Entry 2 326 2-3 1302 -1303 3 480 1-2 1917 -1918 4 633 634 4 1 2532 2533 5 787 3-4 3147 -3148 6 941 2-3 3762 -3763 7 1095 1-2 4377 -4378 V506 53 683(A) 1 173 1-2 689 -690 How many? (Do not include yourself, the offender or children under 12 years of age.) (Allocated) 01-09 Number of persons 2 326 327 4 1 1304 1305 3 480 3-4 1919 -1920 4 634 2-3 2534 -2535 5 788 1-2 3149 -3150 6 941 942 4 1 3764 3765 7 1095 3-4 4379 -4380 V507 54 684(O) 1 173 3-4 691 -692 How many of these persons are members of your household now? (Do not include yourself, the offender or children under 12 years of age.) (Original) 00 None 01-09 Number of persons 10-96 Invalid Entry 2 327 2-3 1306 -1307 3 481 1-2 1921 -1922 4 634 635 4 1 2536 2537 5 788 3-4 3151 -3152 6 942 2-3 3766 -3767 7 1096 1-2 4381 -4382 Page 221 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V508 54 684(A) 1 174 1-2 693 -694 How many of these persons are members of your household now? (Do not include yourself, the offender or children under 12 years of age.) (Allocated) 00 None 01-09 Number of persons 2 327 328 4 1 1308 1309 3 481 3-4 1923 -1924 4 635 2-3 2538 -2539 5 789 1-2 3153 -3154 6 942 943 4 1 3768 3769 7 1096 3-4 4383 -4384 V509 Check Item G 685 1 174 3 695 Check Item G Did respondent use or threaten to use physical force against offender? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue 2 328 2 1310 3 482 1 1925 4 635 4 2540 5 789 3 3155 6 943 2 3770 7 1097 1 4385 V510 55 686 1 174 4 696 Who was the first to use or threaten to use physical force - you, the offender, or someone else? 1 Respondent 2 Offender(s) 3 Someone else 4 Don't know 8 Residue 2 328 3 1311 3 482 2 1926 4 636 1 2541 5 789 4 3156 6 943 3 3771 7 1097 2 4386 Page 222 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V511 56 687 1 175 1 697 Do you know or have you learned anything about offender(s) - for instance, whether there was one or more than one offender involved, whether it was someone young or old, or male or female? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue 2 328 4 1312 3 482 3 1927 4 636 2 2542 5 790 1 3157 6 943 4 3772 7 1097 3 4387 V512 57 688 1 175 2 698 How sure are you of this information? Do you have a suspicion, are you fairly sure or are you certain? 1 Suspicion 2 Fairly sure 3 Certain 8 Residue 2 329 1 1313 3 482 4 1928 4 636 3 2543 5 790 2 3158 6 944 1 3773 7 1097 4 4388 58 689-690 How did you learn about the offender(s)? Any other way? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-10. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-10. Page 223 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V513 V514V523 58 689-690 Lead-in code locations NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. Category codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. ______________ 1 Respondent saw or heard offender 2 From other member of household who was eyewitness 3 From eyewitness(es) other than household member(s) 4 From police 5 Other person (not eyewitness) 6 Offender(s) admitted it 7 Offender(s) had threatened to do it 1 175 3 699 2 329 2 1314 3 483 1 1929 4 636 4 2544 5 790 3 3159 6 944 2 3774 7 1098 1 4389 Category code locations 1 175 4 700 176 1-4 701 -704 177 1-4 705 -708 178 1 709 2 329 3-4 1315 -1316 330 1-4 1317 -1320 331 1-4 1321 -1324 3 483 2-4 1930 -1932 484 1-4 1933 -1936 485 1-3 1937 -1939 4 637 1-4 2545 -2548 638 1-4 2549 -2552 639 1-2 2553 -2554 Page 224 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V524 58 (cont.) 689-690 (cont.) 5 790 4 3160 8 Stolen property found on offender's property or in offender's possession 9 Figured it out by who had motive, opportunity, or had done it before 10 Other Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 791 1-4 3161 -3164 792 1-4 3165 -3168 793 1 3169 6 944 3-4 3775 -3776 945 1-4 3777 -3780 946 1-4 3781 -3784 7 1098 2-4 4390 -4392 1099 1-4 4393 -4396 1100 1-3 4397 -4399 Residue code locations 1 178 2 710 2 332 1 1325 3 485 4 1940 4 639 3 2555 5 793 2 3170 6 947 1 3785 7 1100 4 4400 Page 225 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V525 V526V533 59 691 Lead-in code locations What actually happened? Anything else? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-8. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-8. NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. Category codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. 1 178 3 711 2 332 2 1326 3 486 1 1941 4 639 4 2556 5 793 3 3171 6 947 2 3786 7 1101 1 4401 Category code locations 1 178 4 712 179 1-4 713 -716 180 1-3 717 -719 2 332 3-4 1327 -1328 333 1-4 1329 -1332 334 1-2 1333 -1334 3 486 2-4 1942 -1944 487 1-4 1945 -1948 488 1 1949 4 640 1-4 2557 -2560 641 1-4 2561 -2564 5 793 4 3172 794 1-4 3173 -3176 795 1-3 3177 -3179 Page 226 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V534 59 (cont.) 691 (cont.) 6 947 3-4 3787 -3788 1 Something taken without permission 2 Attempted or threatened to take something 3 Harassed, argument, abusive language 4 Forcible entry or attempted forcible entry of house/apartment 5 Forcible entry or attempted forcible entry of car 6 Damaged or destroyed property 7 Attempted or threatened to damage or destroy property 8 Other Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 948 1-4 3789 -3792 949 1-2 3793 -3794 7 1101 2-4 4402 -4404 1102 1-4 4405 -4408 1103 1 4409 Residue code locations 1 180 4 720 2 334 3 1335 3 488 2 1950 4 642 1 2565 5 795 4 3180 6 949 3 3795 7 1103 2 4410 V535 60 692 1 181 1 721 Was the crime committed by only one or by more than one offender? 1 Only one 2 More than one 3 Don't know 8 Residue 2 334 4 1336 3 488 3 1951 4 642 2 2566 5 796 1 3181 6 949 4 3796 7 1103 3 4411 Page 227 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V536 61 693 1 181 2 722 Do you know anything about one of the offenders? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue 2 335 1 1337 3 488 4 1952 4 642 3 2567 5 796 2 3182 6 950 1 3797 7 1103 4 4412 V537 62 698 1 181 3 723 Was the offender male or female? 1 Male 2 Female 3 Don't know 8 Residue 2 335 2 1338 3 489 1 1953 4 642 4 2568 5 796 3 3183 6 950 2 3798 7 1104 1 4413 V538 63 699 1 181 4 724 How old would you say the offender was? 1 Under 12 2 12-14 3 15-17 4 18-20 5 21-29 6 30+ 7 Don't know 8 Residue 2 335 3 1339 3 489 2 1954 4 643 1 2569 5 796 4 3184 6 950 3 3799 7 1104 2 4414 Page 228 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V539 64a 700 1 182 1 725 Was the offender a member of a street gang, or don't you know? 1 Yes (a member of a street gang) 2 No (not a member of a street gang) 3 Don't know (if a member of a street gang) 8 Residue 2 335 4 1340 3 489 3 1955 4 643 2 2570 5 797 1 3185 6 950 4 3800 7 1104 3 4415 V540 64b 701 1 182 2 726 Was the offender drinking or on drugs, or don't you know? 1 Yes (drinking or on drugs) 2 No (not drinking/not on drugs) 3 Don't know (if drinking or on drugs) 8 Residue 2 336 1 1341 3 489 4 1956 4 643 3 2571 5 797 2 3186 6 951 1 3801 7 1104 4 4416 V541 65 702 1 182 3 727 Which was it? (Drinking or on drugs?) 1 Drinking 2 On drugs 3 Both (drinking and on drugs) 4 Drinking or on drugs could not tell which 8 Residue 2 336 2 1342 3 490 1 1957 4 643 4 2572 5 797 3 3187 6 951 2 3802 7 1105 1 4417 Page 229 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V542 66 703 1 182 4 728 Was the offender someone you know or a stranger you had never seen before? 1 Knew or had seen before 2 Stranger 3 Don't know 6 Don't know if box 2 (Stranger) or box 3 (Don't know) 8 Residue 2 336 3 1343 3 490 2 1958 4 644 1 2573 5 797 4 3188 6 951 3 3803 7 1105 2 4418 V543 67 704 1 183 1 729 Would you be able to recognize the offender if you saw him/her? 1 Yes 2 Not sure (possibly or probably) 3 No 6 Don't know if box 1 (Yes) or box 2 (Not sure) 8 Residue 2 336 4 1344 3 490 3 1959 4 644 2 2574 5 798 1 3189 6 951 4 3804 7 1105 3 4419 V544 68 705 1 183 2 730 How well did you know the offender by sight only, casual acquaintance, or well known? 1 Sight only 2 Casual acquaintance 3 Well known 6 Don't know if box 2 (Casual acquaintance) or box 3 (Well known) 8 Residue 2 337 1 1345 3 490 4 1960 4 644 3 2575 5 798 2 3190 6 952 1 3805 7 1105 4 4420 Page 230 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V545 69 706 1 183 3 731 Would you have been able to tell the police how they might find the offender, for instance, where he/she lived, worked, went to school, or spent time? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Other 8 Residue 2 337 2 1346 3 491 1 1961 4 644 4 2576 5 798 3 3191 6 952 2 3806 7 1106 1 4421 V546 70 707 1 183 184 4 1 732 733 How did you know the offender? For example, was the offender a friend, cousin, etc.? RELATIVE 01 Spouse at time of incident 02 Ex-spouse at time of incident 03 Parent or step-parent 04 Own child or stepchild 05 Brother/sister 06 Other relative NONRELATIVE 07 Boyfriend or girlfriend, ex-boyfriend or ex-girlfriend 08 Friend or ex-friend 09 Roommate, boarder 10 Schoolmate 11 Neighbor 12 Someone at work, customer 13 Other Nonrelative 98 Residue 2 337 3-4 1347 -1348 3 491 2-3 1962 -1963 4 645 1-2 2577 -2578 5 798 799 4 1 3192 3193 6 952 3-4 3807 -3808 7 1106 2-3 4422 -4423 Page 231 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V547 71 708 1 184 2 734 Was the offender White, Black, or some other race? 1 White 2 Black 3 Other 4 Don't know 8 Residue 2 338 1 1349 3 491 4 1964 4 645 3 2579 5 799 2 3194 6 953 1 3809 7 1106 4 4424 V548 72 709 1 184 3 735 Was this the only time this offender committed a crime or made threats against you or your household? 1 Yes (only time) 2 No (there were other times) 3 Don't know 8 Residue 2 338 2 1350 3 492 1 1965 4 645 4 2580 5 799 3 3195 6 953 2 3810 7 1107 1 4425 V549 73 710 1 184 4 736 (Multiple Offenders) How many offenders? 02-96 Actual number of offenders 97 Don't know (number of offenders) 98 Residue 185 1 737 2 338 3-4 1351 -1352 3 492 2-3 1966 -1967 4 646 1-2 2581 -2582 5 799 4 3196 800 1 3197 73 (cont.) 710 (cont.) 6 953 3-4 3811 -3812 7 1107 2-3 4426 -4427 Page 232 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V550 74 711 1 185 2 738 (Multiple Offenders) Were they male or female? 1 All male 2 All female 3 Don't know sex of any offenders 4 Both male and female 8 Residue 2 339 1 1353 3 492 4 1968 4 646 3 2583 5 800 2 3198 6 954 1 3813 7 1107 4 4428 V551 75 712 1 185 3 739 (Multiple Offenders) Were they mostly male or mostly female? 1 Mostly male 2 Mostly female 3 Evenly divided 4 Don't know 8 Residue 2 339 2 1354 3 493 1 1969 4 646 4 2584 5 800 3 3199 6 954 2 3814 7 1108 1 4429 V552 76 713 1 185 4 740 (Multiple Offenders) How old would you say the youngest was? 1 Under 12 2 12-14 3 15-17 4 18-20 5 21 - 29 6 30 + 7 Don't know 8 Residue 2 339 3 1355 3 493 2 1970 4 647 1 2585 5 800 4 3200 6 954 3 3815 7 1108 2 4430 Page 233 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V553 77 714 1 186 1 741 (Multiple Offenders) How old would you say the oldest was? 1 Under 12 2 12-14 3 15-17 4 18-20 5 21 - 29 6 30 + 7 Don't know 8 Residue 2 339 4 1356 3 493 3 1971 4 647 2 2586 5 801 1 3201 6 954 4 3816 7 1108 3 4431 V554 78a 715 1 186 2 742 (Multiple Offenders) Were any of the offenders a member of a street gang, or don't you know? 1 Yes (a member of a street gang) 2 No (not a member of a street gang) 3 Don't know (if a member of a street gang) 8 Residue 2 340 1 1357 3 493 4 1972 4 647 3 2587 5 801 2 3202 6 955 1 3817 7 1108 4 4432 V555 78b 716 1 186 3 743 (Multiple Offenders) Were any of the offenders drinking or on drugs, or don't you know? 1 Yes (drinking or on drugs) 2 No (not drinking/not on drugs) 3 Don't know (if drinking or on drugs) 8 Residue 2 340 2 1358 3 494 1 1973 4 647 4 2588 5 801 3 3203 6 955 2 3818 7 1109 1 4433 V556 79 717 1 186 4 744 (Multiple Offenders) Which was it? (Drinking or on drugs?) 1 Drinking 2 On drugs 3 Both (drinking and on drugs) 4 Drinking or on drugs could not tell which 8 Residue 2 340 3 1359 3 494 2 1974 4 648 1 2589 5 801 4 3204 6 955 3 3819 Page 234 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 7 1109 2 4434 V557 80 718 1 187 1 745 (Multiple Offenders) Were any of the offenders known to you, or were they all strangers you had never seen before? 1 All known 2 Some known 3 All strangers 4 Don't know 5 Don't know if box 3 (All strangers) or box 4 (Don't know) 6 Don't know if box 1 (All known) or box 2 (Some known) 8 Residue 2 340 4 1360 3 494 3 1975 4 648 2 2590 5 802 1 3205 6 955 4 3820 7 1109 3 4435 V558 81 719 1 187 2 746 (Multiple Offenders) Would you be able to recognize any of them if you saw them? 1 Yes 2 Not sure (possibly or probably) 3 No 6 Don't know if box 1 (Yes) or box 2 (Not sure) 8 Residue 2 341 1 1361 3 494 4 1976 4 648 3 2591 5 802 2 3206 6 956 1 3821 7 1109 4 4436 Page 235 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 82 720 (Multiple Offenders) How well did you know the offender(s) - by sight only, casual acquaintance or well known? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-3. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-3. NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. Page 236 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V559 V560V562 82 (cont.) 720 (cont.) Lead-in code locations Category codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions 8 Indicates an ‘NA’ when ALL of the following category positions are blank. ______________ 1 Sight only 2 Casual acquaintance 3 Well known ______________ Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 1 187 3 747 2 341 2 1362 3 495 1 1977 4 648 4 2592 5 802 3 3207 6 956 2 3822 7 1110 1 4437 Category code locations 1 187 4 748 188 1-2 749 -750 2 341 3-4 1363 -1364 342 1 1365 3 495 2-4 1978 -1980 4 649 1-3 2593 -2595 5 802 4 3208 803 1-2 3209 -3210 6 956 3-4 3823 -3824 957 1 3825 7 1110 2-4 4438 -4440 V563 82 (cont.) 720 (cont.) Residue code locations 1 188 3 751 2 342 2 1366 Page 237 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 3 496 1 1981 4 649 4 2596 5 803 3 3211 6 957 2 3826 7 1111 1 4441 V564 83 722 1 188 4 752 (Multiple Offenders) Would you have been able to tell the police how they might find any of them, for instance, where they lived, worked, went to school, or spent time? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Other 8 Residue 2 342 3 1367 3 496 2 1982 4 650 1 2597 5 803 4 3212 6 957 3 3827 7 1111 2 4442 84 723-725 (Multiple Offenders) How did you know them? For example, were they friends, cousins, etc.? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-13. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-13. Page 238 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V565 V566V578 84 (cont.) 723-725 (cont.) Lead-in code locations NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. Category codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. ______________ RELATIVE 1 Spouse at time of incident 2 Ex-spouse at time of incident 3 Parent or step-parent 4 Own child or stepchild 5 Brother/sister 6 Other relative 1 189 1 753 2 342 4 1368 3 496 3 1983 4 650 2 2598 5 804 1 3213 6 957 4 3828 7 1111 3 4443 Category code locations 1 189 2-4 754 -756 190 1-4 757 -760 191 1-4 761 -764 192 1-2 765 -766 2 343 1-4 1369 -1372 344 1-4 1373 -1376 345 1-4 1377 -1380 346 1 1381 Page 239 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V579 84 (cont.) 723-725 (cont.) 3 496 4 1984 NONRELATIVE 7 Boyfriend or girlfriend, ex-boyfriend or ex-girlfriend 8 Friend or ex-friend 9 Roommate, boarder 10 Schoolmate 11 Neighbor 12 Someone at work, customer 13 Other Nonrelative Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 497 1-4 1985 -1988 498 1-4 1989 -1992 499 1-4 1993 -1996 4 650 3-4 2599 -2600 651 1-4 2601 -2604 652 1-4 2605 -2608 653 1-3 2609 -2611 5 804 2-4 3214 -3216 805 1-4 3217 -3220 806 1-4 3221 -3224 807 1-2 3225 -3226 6 958 1-4 3829 -3832 959 1-4 3833 -3836 960 1-4 3837 -3840 961 1 3841 7 1111 4 4444 1112 1-4 4445 -4448 1113 1-4 4449 -4452 1114 1-4 4453 -4456 Residue code locations 1 192 3 767 2 346 2 1382 3 500 1 1997 84 (cont.) 723-725 (cont.) 4 653 4 2612 5 807 3 3227 6 961 2 3842 7 1115 1 4457 Page 240 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 85 726 (Multiple Offenders) Were the offenders White, Black, or some other race? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes1-4. 8 No good entry (out of range) in one or more of the answer category codes 1-4. NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. __________ Category codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. Page 241 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V580 V581V584 85 (cont.) 726 (cont.) Lead-in code locations 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. ______________ 1 White 2 Black 3 Other 4 Don't know race of any/some _______________ Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 1 192 4 768 2 346 3 1383 3 500 2 1998 4 654 1 2613 5 807 4 3228 6 961 3 3843 7 1115 2 4458 Category code locations 1 193 1-4 769 -772 2 346 4 1384 347 1-3 1385 -1387 3 500 3-4 1999 -2000 501 1-2 2001 -2002 4 654 2-4 2614 -2616 655 1 2617 5 808 1-4 3229 -3232 6 961 4 3844 962 1-3 3845 -3847 7 1115 3-4 4459 -4460 1116 1-2 4461 -4462 V585 85 (cont.) 726 (cont.) Residue code locations 1 194 1 773 2 347 4 1388 Page 242 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 3 501 3 2003 4 655 2 2618 5 809 1 3233 6 962 4 3848 7 1116 3 4463 V586 86 727 1 194 2 774 (Multiple Offenders) What race were most of the offenders? 1 Mostly White 2 Mostly Black 3 Mostly some other race 4 Equal number of each race 5 Don't know 8 Residue 2 348 1 1389 3 501 4 2004 4 655 3 2619 5 809 2 3234 6 963 1 3849 7 1116 4 4464 V587 87 730 1 194 3 775 (Multiple Offenders) Was this the only time any of these offenders committed a crime or made threats against you or your household? 1 Yes (only time) 2 No (there were other times) 3 Don't know 8 Residue 2 348 2 1390 3 502 1 2005 4 655 4 2620 5 809 3 3235 6 963 2 3850 7 1117 1 4465 V588 88 731(O) 1 194 4 776 Was something stolen or taken without permission that belonged to you or others in the household? (Original) 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 0, 4-9 Invalid Entry 2 348 3 1391 3 502 2 2006 4 656 1 2621 5 809 4 3236 6 963 3 3851 7 1117 2 4466 Page 243 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V589 88 731(A) 1 195 1 777 Was something stolen or taken without permission that belonged to you or others in the household? (Allocated) 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 2 348 4 1392 3 502 3 2007 4 656 2 2622 5 810 1 3237 6 963 4 3852 7 1117 3 4467 V590 89 732(O) 1 195 2 778 Did the offender(s) attempt to take something that belonged to you or others in the household? (Original) 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 0, 4-9 Invalid Entry 2 349 1 1393 3 502 4 2008 4 656 3 2623 5 810 2 3238 6 964 1 3853 7 1117 4 4468 V591 89 732(A) 1 195 3 779 Did the offender(s) attempt to take something that belonged to you or others in the household? (Allocated) 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 2 349 2 1394 3 503 1 2009 4 656 4 2624 5 810 3 3239 6 964 2 3854 7 1118 1 4469 Page 244 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 90 733-737 What did the offender try to take? Anything else? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-17. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-17. NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. Page 245 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V592 V593V609 90 (cont.) 733-737 (cont.) Lead-in code locations Category codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. ______________ 1 Cash 2 Purse 3 Wallet 4 Credit cards, checks, bank cards 5 Car 6 Other motor vehicle 7 Part of motor vehicle (tire, hubcap, attached tape deck, attached CB radio, etc.) 8 Gasoline or oil 9 Bicycle or parts 10 TV, stereo, other household appliances 11 Silver, china, art objects 12 Other household furnishings (furniture, rugs, etc.) 1 195 4 780 2 349 3 1395 3 503 2 2010 4 657 1 2625 5 810 4 3240 6 964 3 3855 7 1118 2 4470 Category code locations 1 196 1-4 781 -784 197 1-4 785 -788 198 1-4 789 -792 199 1-4 793 -796 200 1 797 2 349 4 1396 350 1-4 1397 -1400 351 1-4 1401 -1404 352 1-4 1405 -1408 353 1-4 1409 -1412 3 503 3-4 2011 -2012 504 1-4 2013 -2016 505 1-4 2017 -2020 506 1-4 2021 -2024 507 1-3 2025 -2027 Page 246 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 90 (cont.) 733-737 (cont.) 4 657 2-4 2626 -2628 13 Personal effects (clothing, jewelry, toys, etc.) 14 Handgun (pistol, revolver) 15 Other firearm (rifle, shotgun) 16 Other 17 Don't know ____________________ Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 658 1-4 2629 -2632 659 1-4 2633 -2636 660 1-4 2637 -2640 661 1-2 2641 -2642 5 811 1-4 3241 -3244 812 1-4 3245 -3248 813 1-4 3249 -3252 814 1-4 3253 -3256 815 1 3257 6 964 4 3856 965 1-4 3857 -3860 966 1-4 3861 -3864 967 1-4 3865 -3868 968 1-4 3869 -3872 7 1118 3-4 4471 -4472 1119 1-4 4473 -4476 1120 1-4 4477 -4480 1121 1-4 4481 -4484 1122 1-3 4485 -4487 V610 90 (cont.) 733-737 (cont.) Residue code locations 1 200 2 798 2 354 1 1413 Page 247 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 3 507 4 2028 4 661 3 2643 5 815 2 3258 6 969 1 3873 7 1122 4 4488 V611 91 738 1 200 3 799 Did the (property/money) the offender tried to take belong to you personally, to someone else in the household, or to both you and other household members? 1 Respondent only 2 Respondent and other household member(s) 3 Other household member(s) only 4 Nonhousehold member(s) only 5 Other 8 Residue 2 354 2 1414 3 508 1 2029 4 661 4 2644 5 815 3 3259 6 969 2 3874 7 1123 1 4489 Check Item J 739 Check Item J Besides the respondent, which household member(s) owned the (property/money) the offender tried to take? Page 248 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V612 V613 Check Item J (cont.) 739 (cont.) First Line Number locations First Line Number 01-39; 41-96 Line number 98 Residue Second Line Number (Same codes as used in First Line Number above.) Third Line Number (Same codes as used in First Line Number above.) OR 40 Household property 1 200 4 800 201 1 801 2 354 3-4 1415 -1416 3 508 2-3 2030 -2031 4 662 1-2 2645 -2646 5 815 4 3260 816 1 3261 6 969 3-4 3875 -3876 7 1123 2-3 4490 -4491 Second Line Number locations 1 201 2-3 802 -803 2 355 1-2 1417 -1418 3 508 4 2032 509 1 2033 4 662 3-4 2647 -2648 Page 249 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V614 Check Item J (cont.) 739 (cont.) 5 816 2-3 3262 -3263 6 970 1-2 3877 -3878 7 1123 4 4492 1124 1 4493 Third Line Number locations 1 201 4 804 202 1 805 2 355 3-4 1419 -1420 3 509 2-3 2034 -2035 4 663 1-2 2649 -2650 5 816 4 3264 817 1 3265 6 970 3-4 3879 -3880 7 1124 2-3 4494 -4495 V615 92 740 1 202 2 806 Was/Were the article(s) in or attached to a motor vehicle when the attempt was made to take (it/them)? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue 2 356 1 1421 3 509 4 2036 4 663 3 2651 5 817 2 3266 6 971 1 3881 Page 250 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 7 1124 4 4496 V616 93 742(O) 1 202 3 807 Was the (cash/purse/wallet) on your person, for instance, in a pocket or being held? (Original) 1 Yes 2 No 0, 3-9 Invalid Entry 2 356 2 1422 3 510 1 2037 4 663 4 2652 5 817 3 3267 6 971 2 3882 7 1125 1 4497 V617 93 742(A) 1 202 4 808 Was the (cash/purse/wallet) on your person, for instance, in a pocket or being held? (Allocated) 1 Yes 2 No 2 356 3 1423 3 510 2 2038 4 664 1 2653 5 817 4 3268 6 971 3 3883 7 1125 2 4498 V618 94 745 1 203 1 809 Was there anything (else) the offender(s) tried to take directly from you, for instance, from your pocket or hands, or something that you were wearing? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue 2 356 4 1424 3 510 3 2039 4 664 2 2654 5 818 1 3269 6 971 4 3884 7 1125 3 4499 Page 251 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 95 746 Which items did the offender(s) try to take directly from you? First Item Tried to Take 01 Only cash taken 02 Purse 03 Wallet 04 Credit cards, checks, bank cards 05 Car 06 Other motor vehicle 07 Part of motor vehicle (tire, hubcap, attached tape deck, attached CB radio, etc.) 08 Gasoline or oil 09 Bicycle or parts 10 TV, stereo, other household appliances 11 Silver, china, art objects 12 Other household furnishings (furniture, rugs, etc.) 13 Personal effects (clothing, jewelry, toys, etc.) 14 Handgun (pistol, revolver) Page 252 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V619 V620 95 746 First Item (Tried to take) locations 15 Other firearm (rifle, shotgun) 16 Other 17 Don't know 40 Tried to take everything marked in Item 90 directly from respondent 98 Residue 99 Blank or original entry in Item 90 was 01 (Cash), 02 (Purse), or 03 (Wallet) Second Item Tried to Take (Same codes as listed under First Item Tried to Take.) 1 203 2-3 810 -811 2 357 1-2 1425 -1426 3 510 4 2040 511 1 2041 4 664 3-4 2655 -2656 5 818 2-3 3270 -3271 6 972 1-2 3885 -3886 7 1125 4 4500 1126 1 4501 Second Item (Tried to take) locations 1 203 4 812 204 1 813 2 357 3-4 1427 -1428 Page 253 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V621 95 (cont.) 746 (cont.) 3 511 2-3 2042 -2043 Third Item Tried to Take (Same codes as listed under First Item Tried to Take) 4 665 1-2 2657 -2658 5 818 4 3272 819 1 3273 6 972 3-4 3887 -3888 7 1126 2-3 4502 -4503 Third Item (Tried to take) locations 1 204 2-3 814 -815 2 358 1-2 1429 -1430 3 511 2044 -2045 512 4 665 3-4 2659 -2660 5 819 2-3 3274 -3275 6 973 1-2 3889 -3890 7 1126 4 4504 1127 1 4505 Page 254 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V622 96 747 1 204 4 816 What was taken that belonged to you or others in the household? Anything else? Cash 00000 None 00001-99996 Amount of cash taken 99998 Residue 205 1-4 817 -820 2 358 3-4 1431 -1432 359 1-3 1433 -1435 3 512 2-4 2046 -2048 513 1-2 2049 -2050 4 666 1-4 2661 -2664 667 1 2665 5 819 4 3276 820 1-4 3277 -3280 6 973 3-4 3891 -3892 974 1-3 3893 -3895 7 1127 2-4 4506 -4508 1128 1-2 4509 -4510 96 748-755 What was taken that belonged to you or others in the household? Anything else? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-27. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-27. Page 255 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V623 V624V650 96 748-755 Lead-in code locations NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. ___________ Category codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. ______________ Cash 1 Only cash taken 1 206 1 821 2 359 4 1436 3 513 3 2051 4 667 2 2666 5 821 1 3281 6 974 4 3896 7 1128 3 4511 Category code locations 1 206 2-4 822 -824 207 1-4 825 -828 208 1-4 829 -832 209 1-4 833 -836 210 1-4 837 -840 211 1-4 841 -844 212 1-4 845 -848 Page 256 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 96 (cont.) 748-755 (cont.) 2 360 1-4 1437 -1440 Property PURSE/WALLET/CREDIT CARDS 2 Purse 3 Wallet 4 Credit cards, checks, bank cards VEHICLE OR PARTS 5 Car 6 Other motor vehicle 7 Part of motor vehicle (tire, hubcap, attached tape deck, attached CB radio, etc.) 8 Unattached motor vehicle accessories or equipment (unattached radio, etc.) 9 Gasoline or oil 10 Bicycle or parts HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS 11 TV, VCR, stereo, other household appliances 12 Silver, china, art objects 13 Other household furnishings (furniture, rugs, etc.) PERSONAL EFFECTS 14 Portable electronic and photographic gear (Personal stereo, TV, calculator, camera, etc.) 15 Clothing, furs, luggage 16 Jewelry, watch, keys 361 1-4 1441 -1444 362 1-4 1445 -1448 363 1-4 1449 -1452 364 1-4 1453 -1456 365 1-4 1457 -1460 366 1-3 1461 -1463 3 513 3-4 2052 -2052 514 1-4 2053 -2056 515 1-4 2057 -2060 516 1-4 2061 -2064 517 1-4 2065 -2068 518 1-4 2069 -2072 519 1-4 2073 -2076 520 1-2 2077 -2078 4 667 3-4 2667 -2668 668 1-4 2669 -2672 669 1-4 2673 -2676 670 1-4 2677 -2680 671 1-4 2681 -2684 672 1-4 2685 -2688 673 1-4 2689 -2692 674 1 2693 Page 257 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 96 (cont.) 748-755 (cont.) 5 821 2-4 3282 -3284 PERSONAL EFFECTS (cont.) 17 Collection of stamps, coins, etc. 18 Toys, sports and recreation equipment (not listed above) 19 Other personal and portable objects FIREARMS 20 Handgun (pistol, revolver) 21 Other firearm (rifle, shotgun) MISCELLANEOUS 22 Tools, machines, office equipment 23 Farm or garden produce, plants, fruit, logs 24 Animals - pet or livestock 25 Food or liquor 26 Other-specify 27 Don't know _____________ Residue codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 822 1-4 3285 -3288 823 1-4 3289 -3292 824 1-4 3293 -3296 825 1-4 3297 -3300 826 1-4 3301 -3304 827 1-4 3305 -3308 6 975 1-4 3897 -3900 976 1-4 3901 -3904 977 1-4 3905 -3908 978 1-4 3909 -3912 979 1-4 3913 -3916 980 1-4 3917 -3920 981 1-3 3921 -3923 7 1128 4 4512 1129 1-4 4513 -4516 1130 1-4 4517 -4520 1131 1-4 4521 -4524 1132 1-4 4525 -4528 1133 1-4 4529 -4532 1134 1-4 4533 -4536 1135 1-2 4537 -4538 V651 96 (cont.) 748-755 (cont.) Residue code locations 1 213 1 849 2 366 4 1464 Page 258 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 3 520 3 2079 4 674 2 2694 5 828 1 3309 6 981 4 3924 7 1135 3 4539 V652 97 760 1 213 2 850 Did the stolen (property/money) belong to you personally, to someone else in the household, or to both you and other household members? 1 Respondent only 2 Respondent and other household member(s) 3 Other household member(s) only 4 Nonhousehold member(s) only 5 Other 8 Residue 2 367 1 1465 3 520 4 2080 4 674 3 2695 5 828 2 3310 6 982 1 3925 7 1135 4 4540 Check Item L 761 Check Item L Besides the respondent, which household member(s) owned the stolen (property/money)? Page 259 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V653 V654 V655 Check Item L (cont.) 761 (cont.) First Line number locations First Line Number 01-39; 41-96 Line number OR 40 Household property 98 Residue Second Line Number (Same codes as used in First Line Number above.) Third Line Number (Same codes as used in First Line Number above.) 1 213 3-4 851 -852 2 367 2-3 1466 -1467 3 521 1-2 2081 -2082 4 674 675 4 1 2696 2697 5 828 3-4 3311 -3312 6 982 2-3 3926 -3927 7 1136 1-2 4541 -4542 Second Line number locations 1 214 1-2 853 -854 2 367 368 4 1 1468 1469 3 521 3-4 2083 -2084 4 675 2-3 2698 -2699 5 829 1-2 3313 -3314 6 982 983 4 1 3928 3929 7 1136 3-4 4543 -4544 Third Line number locations 1 214 3-4 855 -856 2 368 2-3 1470 -1471 3 522 1-2 2085 -2086 4 675 676 4 1 2700 2701 Check Item L (cont.) 761 (cont) 5 829 3-4 3315 -3316 6 983 2-3 3930 -3931 7 1137 1-2 4545 -4546 Page 260 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V656 98 763 1 215 1 857 Had permission to use the (car/motor vehicle) ever been given to the offender(s)? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 8 Residue 2 368 4 1472 3 522 3 2087 4 676 2 2702 5 830 1 3317 6 983 4 3932 7 1137 3 4547 V657 99 764 1 215 2 858 Did the offender return the (car/motor vehicle) this time? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue 2 369 1 1473 3 522 4 2088 4 676 3 2703 5 830 2 3318 6 984 1 3933 7 1137 4 4548 V658 100 765 1 215 3 859 Was/Were the article(s) in or attached to a motor vehicle when (they were/it was) taken? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue 2 369 2 1474 3 523 1 2089 4 676 4 2704 5 830 3 3319 6 984 2 3934 7 1138 1 4549 V659 101 767(O) 1 215 4 860 Was the (cash/purse/wallet) on your person, for instance, in a pocket or being held? (Original) 1 Yes 2 No 0, 3-9 Invalid Entry 2 369 3 1475 3 523 2 2090 4 677 1 2705 5 830 4 3320 6 984 3 3935 7 1138 2 4550 Page 261 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V660 101 767(A) 1 216 1 861 Was the (cash/purse/wallet) on your person, for instance, in a pocket or being held? (Allocated) 1 Yes 2 No 2 369 4 1476 3 523 3 2091 4 677 2 2706 5 831 1 3321 6 984 4 3936 7 1138 3 4551 V661 102 768 1 216 2 862 Was there anything (else) the offender(s) took directly from you, for instance, from your pocket or hands, or something that you were wearing? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue 2 370 1 1477 3 523 4 2092 4 677 3 2707 5 831 2 3322 6 985 1 3937 7 1138 4 4552 Page 262 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V662 V663 103 769 First Item Taken locations Which items did the offender(s) take directly from you? First Item Taken PROPERTY 04 Credit cards, checks, bank cards VEHICLE OR PARTS 05 Car 06 Other motor vehicle 07 Part of motor vehicle (tire, hubcap, attached tape deck, attached CB radio, etc.) 08 Unattached motor vehicle accessories or equipment (unattached radio, etc.) 09 Gasoline or oil 10 Bicycle or parts HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS 11 TV, VCR, stereo, other household appliances 12 Silver, china, art objects 13 Other household furnishings (furniture, rugs, etc.) 1 216 3-4 863 -864 2 370 2-3 1478 -1479 3 524 1-2 2093 -2094 4 677 678 4 1 2708 2709 5 831 3-4 3323 -3324 6 985 2-3 3938 -3939 7 1139 1-2 4553 -4554 Second Item Taken locations 1 217 1-2 865 -866 2 370 371 4 1 1480 1481 3 524 3-4 2095 -2096 4 678 2-3 2710 -2711 5 832 1-2 3325 -3326 6 985 986 4 1 3940 3941 7 1139 3-4 4555 -4556 Page 263 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V664 103 (cont.) 769 (cont.) Third Item Taken locations PERSONAL EFFECTS 14 Portable electronic and photographic gear (Personal stereo, TV, calculator, camera, etc.) 15 Clothing, furs, luggage, briefcase 16 Jewelry, watch, keys 17 Collection of stamps, coins, etc. 18 Toys, sports and recreation equipment (not listed above) 19 Other personal and portable objects FIREARMS 20 Handgun (pistol, revolver) 21 Other firearm (rifle, shotgun) MISCELLANEOUS 22 Tools, machines, office equipment 23 Farm or garden produce, plants, fruit, logs 24 Animals - pet or livestock 25 Food or liquor 26 Other 27 Don't know 1 217 3-4 867 -868 2 371 2-3 1482 -1483 3 525 1-2 2097 -2098 4 678 679 4 1 2712 2713 5 832 3-4 3327 -3328 6 986 2-3 3942 -3943 7 1140 1-2 4557 -4558 Page 264 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 103 (cont.) 769 (cont.) Which items did the offender(s) take directly from you? (Continued) MISCELLANEOUS (Continued) 40 Everything marked in Item 96 was taken directly from respondent 98 Residue 99 Blank or original entry was 01 (Cash), 02 (Purse), or 03 (Wallet) Second Item Taken (Same codes as listed under First Item Taken.) Third Item Taken (Same codes as listed under First Item Taken.) V665 104 770 1 218 1-4 869 -872 What was the value of the property that was taken? Include recovered property. (Exclude any stolen cash/checks/credit cards. If jointly owned with a Nonhousehold member(s), include only share owned by household members.) 00000 None 00001-99996 Value of property 99998 Residue 219 1 873 2 371 4 1484 372 1-4 1485 -1488 3 525 3-4 2099 -2100 526 1-3 2101 -2103 4 679 2-4 2714 -2716 680 1-2 2717 -2718 5 833 1-4 3329 -3332 834 1 3333 104 (cont.) 770 (cont.) 6 986 4 3944 987 1-4 3945 -3948 7 1140 3-4 4559 -4560 1141 1-3 4561 -4563 Page 265 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V666 V667V673 105 771 Lead-in code locations How did you decide the value of the property that was taken? Any other way? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-7. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-7. NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. Category codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 1 219 2 874 2 373 1 1489 3 526 4 2104 4 680 3 2719 5 834 2 3334 6 988 1 3949 7 1141 4 4564 Category code locations 1 219 3-4 875 -876 220 1-4 877 -880 221 1 881 2 373 2-4 1490 -1492 374 1-4 1493 -1496 3 527 1-4 2105 -2108 528 1-3 2109 -2111 4 680 4 2720 681 1-4 2721 -2724 682 1-2 2725 -2726 Page 266 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V674 105 (cont.) 771 (cont.) 5 834 3-4 3335 -3336 8 Indicates an “NA” when ALL of the following category positions are blank. _____________ 1 Original cost 2 Replacement cost 3 Personal estimate of current value 4 Insurance report estimate 5 Police estimate 6 Don’t know 7 Other Residue codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 835 1-4 3337 -3340 836 1 3341 6 988 2-4 3950 -3952 989 1-4 3953 -3956 7 1142 1-4 4565 -4568 1143 1-3 4569 -4571 Residue code locations 1 221 2 882 2 375 1 1497 3 528 4 2112 4 682 3 2727 5 836 2 3342 6 990 1 3957 7 1143 4 4572 V675 106 772 1 221 3 883 Was all or part of the stolen (money/property) recovered, not counting anything received from insurance? 1 All 2 Part 3 None 6 Don't know if 1 (All) or 2 (Part) 8 Residue 2 375 2 1498 3 529 1 2113 4 682 4 2728 5 836 3 3343 6 990 2 3958 7 1144 1 4573 Page 267 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V676 107 775 1 221 4 884 What was recovered? Anything else? Cash 00000 None 00001-99996 Amount of cash taken 99998 Residue 222 1-4 885 -888 2 375 3-4 1499 -1500 376 1-3 1501 -1503 3 529 2-4 2114 -2116 530 1-2 2117 -2118 4 683 1-4 2729 -2732 684 1 2733 5 836 4 3344 837 1-4 3345 -3348 6 990 3-4 3959 -3960 991 1-3 3961 -3963 7 1144 2-4 4574 -4576 1145 1-2 4577 -4578 107 776 What was recovered? Anything else? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-6. 8 No good entry(out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-6. Page 268 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V677 V678V683 107 (cont.) 776 (cont.) Lead-in code locations NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. __________ What was recovered? Anything else? (Continued) Category codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates n entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. _____________ 1 223 1 889 2 376 4 1504 3 530 3 2119 4 684 2 2734 5 838 1 3349 6 991 4 3964 7 1145 3 4579 Category code locations 1 223 2-4 890 -892 224 1-3 893 -895 2 377 1-4 1505 -1508 378 1-2 1509 -1510 3 530 4 2120 531 1-4 2121 -2124 532 1 2125 4 684 3-4 2735 -2736 685 1-4 2737 -2740 5 838 2-4 3350 -3352 839 1-3 3353 -3355 Page 269 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V684 107 (cont.) 776 (cont.) 6 992 1-4 3965 -3968 Cash 1 Only cash recovered Property 2 Purse 3 Wallet 4 Credit cards, checks, bank cards 5 Car or other motor vehicle 6 Property other than the above _______ Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 993 1-2 3969 -3970 7 1145 4 4580 1146 1-4 4581 -4584 1147 1 4585 Residue code locations 1 224 4 896 2 378 3 1511 3 532 2 2126 4 686 1 2741 5 839 4 3356 6 993 3 3971 7 1147 2 4586 V685 Check Item O 777 1 225 1 897 Check Item O Was property other than cash, checks or credit cards recovered? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue 2 378 4 1512 3 532 3 2127 4 686 2 2742 5 840 1 3357 6 993 4 3972 7 1147 3 4587 Page 270 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V686 108 778 1 225 2-4 898 -900 Considering any damage, what was the value of the property after it was recovered? (Do not include recovered cash, checks, or credit cards.) 00000 None 00001-99996 Actual whole dollar amount 99998 Residue 226 1-2 901 -902 2 379 1-4 1513 -1516 380 1 1517 3 532 4 2128 533 1-4 2129 -2132 4 686 3-4 2743 -2744 687 1-3 2745 -2747 5 840 2-4 3358 -3360 841 1-2 3361 -3362 6 994 1-4 3973 -3976 995 1 3977 7 1147 4 4588 1148 1-4 4589 -4592 V687 109 779 1 226 3 903 Was the theft reported to an insurance company? 1 Yes 2 No or don't have insurance 3 Don't know 8 Residue 2 380 2 1518 3 534 1 2133 4 687 4 2748 5 841 3 3363 6 995 2 3978 7 1149 1 4593 Page 271 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V688 110 780 1 226 4 904 (Other than any stolen property) was anything that belonged to you or other members of the household damaged in this incident? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue 2 380 3 1519 3 534 2 2134 4 688 1 2749 5 841 4 3364 6 995 3 3979 7 1149 2 4594 V689 111 781 1 227 1 905 Was/Were the damaged item(s) repaired or replaced? 1 Yes, all 2 Yes, part 3 No, none 6 Don't know if 1 (Yes, all) or 2 (Yes, part) 8 Residue 2 380 4 1520 3 534 3 2135 4 688 2 2750 5 842 1 3365 6 995 4 3980 7 1149 3 4595 V690 112 782 1 227 2-4 906 -908 How much would it cost to repair or replace the damaged item(s)? 00000 No cost 00001-99996 Actual whole dollar amount 99997 Don't know 99998 Residue 228 1-2 909 -910 2 381 1-4 1521 -1524 382 1 1525 3 534 4 2136 535 1-4 2137 -2140 4 688 3-4 2751 -2752 689 1-3 2753 -2755 5 842 2-4 3366 -3368 843 1-2 3369 -3370 Page 272 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 112 (cont.) 782 (cont.) 6 996 1-4 3981 -3984 How much would it cost to repair or replace the damaged item(s)? (cont.)997 1 3985 7 1149 4 4596 1150 1-4 4597 -4600 V691 113 783 1 228 3-4 911 -912 How much was the repair or replacement cost? 00000 No cost 00001-99996 Actual whole dollar amount 99997 Don't know 99998 Residue 229 1-3 913 -915 2 382 2-4 1526 -1528 383 1-2 1529 -1530 3 536 1-4 2141 -2144 537 1 2145 4 689 4 2756 690 1-4 2757 -2760 5 843 3-4 3371 -3372 844 1-3 3373 -3375 6 997 2-4 3986 -3988 998 1-2 3989 -3990 7 1151 1-4 4601 -4604 1152 1 4605 Page 273 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V692 V693V698 114 784 Lead-in code locations Who (paid/will pay) for the repairs or replacement? Anyone else? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-6. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-6. NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. Category Codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. _____________ 1 229 4 916 2 383 3 1531 3 537 2 2146 4 691 1 2761 5 844 4 3376 6 998 3 3991 7 1152 2 4606 Category code locations 1 230 1-4 917 -920 231 1-2 921 -922 2 383 4 1532 384 1-4 1533 -1536 385 1 1537 3 537 3-4 2147 -2148 538 1-4 2149 -2152 4 691 2-4 2762 -2764 692 1-3 2765 -2767 5 845 1-4 3377 -3380 846 1-2 3381 -3382 6 998 4 3992 999 1-4 3993 -3996 1000 1 3997 7 1152 3-4 4607 -4608 1153 1-4 4609 -4612 Page 274 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V699 114 (cont.) 784 (cont.) Residue code locations 1 Items will not be repaired or replaced 2 Household member 3 Landlord or landlord's insurance 4 Victim's (or household's) insurance 5 Offender 6 Other Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 1 231 3 923 2 385 2 1538 3 539 1 2153 4 692 4 2768 5 846 3 3383 6 1000 2 3998 7 1154 1 4613 V700 115 800 1 231 4 924 Were the police informed or did they find out about this incident in any way? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 8 Residue 2 385 3 1539 3 539 2 2154 4 693 1 2769 5 846 4 3384 6 1000 3 3999 7 1154 2 4614 Page 275 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V701 116 801 1 232 1 925 How did the police find out about it? 1 Respondent 2 Other household member 3 Someone official called police (guard, apt. manager, school official, etc.) 4 Someone else 5 Police were at scene 6 Offender was a police officer 7 Some other way 8 Residue 2 385 4 1540 3 539 3 2155 4 693 2 2770 5 847 1 3385 6 1000 4 4000 7 1154 3 4615 117 802-806 What was the reason it was not reported to the police? (Can you tell me a little more?) Any other reason? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-19. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-19. NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. Page 276 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V702 V703V721 117 802-806 Lead-in code locations Category Codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. DEALT WITH ANOTHER WAY 1 Reported to another official(guard, apt. manager, school official, etc.) 2 Private or personal matter or took care of it myself or informally; told offender’s parent NOT IMPORTANT ENOUGH TO RESPONDENT 3 Minor or unsuccessful crime, small or no loss, recovered property 4 Child offender(s), “kid stuff” 5 Not clear was a crime or that harm was intended 1 232 2 926 2 386 1 1541 3 539 4 2156 4 693 3 2771 5 847 2 3386 6 1001 1 4001 7 1154 4 4616 Category code locations 1 232 233 234 235 236 237 3-4 1-4 1-4 1-4 1-4 1 927 929 933 937 941 945 -----928 932 936 940 944 2 386 387 388 389 390 2-4 1-4 1-4 1-4 1-4 1542 1545 1549 1553 1557 -----1544 1548 1552 1556 1560 Page 277 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 117 (cont.) 802-806 (cont.) 3 540 1-4 2157 -2160 INSURANCE WOULDN’T COVER 6 No insurance, loss less than deductible, etc. POLICE COULDN’T DO ANYTHING 7 Didn’t find out until too late 8 Could not recover or identify property 9 Could not find or identify offender, lack of proof POLICE WOULDN’T HELP 10 Police wouldn’t think it was important enough, wouldn’t want to be bothered or get involved 11 Police would be inefficient (they’d arrive late or not at all, wouldn’t do a good job, etc.) 12 Police would be biased, would harass/insult respondent, cause respondent trouble, etc.) 13 Offender was a police officer OTHER REASON 14 Did not want to get offender in trouble with the law 15 Was advised not to report to police 16 Afraid of reprisal by offender or others 541 1-4 2161 -2164 542 1-4 2165 -2168 543 1-4 2169 -2172 544 1-3 2173 -2175 4 693 4 2772 694 1-4 2773 -2776 695 1-4 2777 -2780 696 1-4 2781 -2784 697 1-4 2785 -2788 698 1-2 2789 -2790 5 847 3-4 3387 -3388 848 1-4 3389 -3392 849 1-4 3393 -3396 850 1-4 3397 -3400 851 1-4 3401 -3404 852 1 3405 6 1001 2-4 4002 -4004 1002 1-4 4005 -4008 1003 1-4 4009 -4012 1004 1-4 4013 -4016 1005 1-4 4017 -4020 Page 278 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V722 117 (cont.) 802-806 (cont.) 7 1155 1-4 4617 -4620 OTHER REASON (cont.) 17 Did not want to or could not take time-too inconvenient 18 Other- specify 19 Respondent not present pr doesn’t know why it wasn’t reported _________________ Residue codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 1156 1-4 4621 -4624 1157 1-4 4625 -4628 1158 1-4 4629 -4632 1159 1-3 4633 -4635 Residue code locations 1 237 2 946 2 391 1 1561 3 544 4 2176 4 698 3 2791 5 852 2 3406 6 1006 1 4021 7 1159 4 4636 Page 279 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V723 118 808 1 237 3-4 947 -948 Which of these would you say was the most important reason why the incident was not reported to the police? DEALT WITH ANOTHER WAY 01 Reported to another official (guard, apt. manager, school official, etc.) 02 Private or personal matter or took care of it myself or informally; told offender's parent NOT IMPORTANT ENOUGH TO RESPONDENT 03 Minor or unsuccessful crime, small or no loss, recovered property 04 Child offender(s), "kid stuff" 05 Not clear was a crime or that harm was intended INSURANCE WOULDN'T COVER 06 No insurance, loss less than deductible, etc. POLICE COULDN'T DO ANYTHING 07 Didn't find out until too late 08 Could not recover or identify property 09 Could not find or identify offender, lack of proof 2 391 2-3 1562 -1563 3 545 1-2 2177 -2178 4 698 699 4 1 2792 2793 5 852 3-4 3407 -3408 6 1006 2-3 4022 -4023 7 1160 1-2 4637 -4638 Page 280 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 118 (cont.) 808 (cont.) POLICE WOULDN'T HELP 10 Police wouldn't think it was important enough, wouldn't want to be bothered or get involved 11 Police would be inefficient, ineffective (they'd arrive late or not at all, wouldn't do a good job, etc.) 12 Police would be biased, would harass/insult respondent, cause respondent trouble, etc. 13 Offender was police officer OTHER REASON 14 Did not want to get offender in trouble with the law 15 Was advised not to report to police 16 Afraid of reprisal by offender or others 17 Did not want to or could not take time too inconvenient 18 Other 19 Respondent not present or doesn't know why it wasn't reported 30 No one reason more important 98 Residue Page 281 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V724 V725V736 119 809-811 Lead-in code locations Besides the fact that it was a crime, did you have any other reason for reporting this incident to the police? Any other reason? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-12. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-12. NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. Category Codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. 1 238 1 949 2 391 4 1564 3 545 3 2179 4 699 2 2794 5 853 1 3409 6 1006 4 4024 7 1160 3 4639 Category code locations 1 238 2-4 950 -952 239 1-4 953 -956 240 1-4 957 -960 241 1 961 2 392 1-4 1565 -1568 393 1-4 1569 -1572 394 1-4 1573 -1576 3 545 4 2180 546 1-4 2181 -2184 547 1-4 2185 -2188 548 1-3 2189 -2191 Page 282 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 119 (cont.) 809-811 (cont.) 4 699 3-4 2795 -2796 TO GET HELP WITH THIS INCIDENT 1 Stop or prevent THIS incident from happening 2 Needed help after incident due to injury, etc. TO RECOVER LOSS 3 To recover property 4 To collect insurance TO GET OFFENDER 5 To prevent further crimes against respondent/respondent 's household by this offender 6 To stop this offender from committing other crimes against anyone 7 To punish offender 8 Catch or find offender - other reason or no reason given TO LET THE POLICE KNOW 9 To improve police surveillance of respondent's home, area, etc. 10 Duty to let police know about crime OTHER 11 Other reason - Specify 12 No other reason 700 1-4 2797 -2800 701 1-4 2801 -2804 702 1-2 2805 -2806 5 853 2-4 3410 -3412 854 1-4 3413 -3416 855 1-4 3417 -3420 856 1 3421 6 1007 1-4 4025 -4028 1008 1-4 4029 -4032 1009 1-4 4033 -4036 7 1160 4 4640 1161 1-4 4641 -4644 1162 1-4 4645 -4648 1163 1-3 4649 -4651 Page 283 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V737 119 (cont.) 809-811 (cont.) Residue code locations Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 1 241 2 962 2 395 1 1577 3 548 4 2192 4 702 3 2807 5 856 2 3422 6 1010 1 4037 7 1163 4 4652 120 813 Which of these would you say was the most important reason why the incident was reported to the police? TO GET HELP WITH THIS INCIDENT 01 Stop or prevent this incident from happening 02 Needed help after incident due to injury, etc. TO RECOVER LOSS 03 To recover property 04 To collect insurance TO GET OFFENDER 05 To prevent further crimes against respondent/respondent 's household by this offender 06 To stop this offender from committing other crimes against anyone Page 284 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V738 120 (cont.) 813 (cont.) 1 241 3-4 963 -964 TO GET OFFENDER (cont.) 07 To punish offender 08 Catch or find offender - other reason or no reason given TO LET POLICE KNOW 09 To improve police surveillance of respondent's home, area, etc. 10 Duty to let police know about crime OTHER 11 Other reason 12 No other reason 21 No one reason more important 22 Because it was a crime was most important 98 Residue 2 395 2-3 1578 -1579 3 549 1-2 2193 -2194 4 702 703 4 1 2808 2809 5 856 3-4 3423 -3424 6 1010 2-3 4038 -4039 7 1164 1-2 4653 -4654 V739 121 814 1 242 1 965 Did the police come when they found out about the incident? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 4 Respondent went to police 6 Don't know if 1 (yes) or 4 (Respondent went to police) 8 Residue 2 395 4 1580 3 549 3 2195 4 703 2 2810 5 857 1 3425 6 1010 4 4040 7 1164 3 4655 Page 285 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V740 122 815 1 242 2 966 How soon after the police found out did they respond? Was it within 5 minutes, within 10 minutes, an hour, a day, or longer? 1 Within 5 minutes 2 Within 10 minutes 3 Within an hour 4 Within a day 5 Longer than a day 6 Don't know how soon 8 Residue 2 396 1 1581 3 549 4 2196 4 703 3 2811 5 857 2 3426 6 1011 1 4041 7 1164 4 4656 123 816-817 What did they do while they were (there/here)? Anything else? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-9. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-9. NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. Page 286 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V741 V742V750 123 (cont.) 816-817 (cont.) Lead-in code locations Category Codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. ______________ 1 Took report 2 Searched/looked around 3 Took evidence (fingerprints, inventory, etc.) 4 Questioned witnesses or suspects 5 Promised surveillance 6 Promised to investigate 7 Made arrest 8 Other 9 Don't know _______________ 1 242 3 967 2 396 2 1582 3 550 1 2197 4 703 4 2812 5 857 3 3427 6 1011 2 4042 7 1165 1 4657 Category code locations 1 242 4 968 243 1-4 969 -972 244 1-4 973 -976 2 396 3-4 1583 -1584 397 1-4 1585 -1588 398 1-3 1589 -1591 3 550 2-4 2198 -2200 551 1-4 2201 -2204 552 1-2 2205 -2206 4 704 1-4 2813 -2816 705 1-4 2817 -2820 706 1 2821 5 857 4 3428 858 1-4 3429 -3432 859 1-4 3433 -3436 Page 287 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V751 123 (cont.) 816-817 (cont.) 6 1011 3-4 4043 -4044 Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 1012 1-4 4045 -4048 1013 1-3 4049 -4051 7 1165 2-4 4658 -4660 1166 1-4 4661 -4664 1167 1-2 4665 -4666 Residue code locations 1 245 1 977 2 398 4 1592 3 552 3 2207 4 706 2 2822 5 860 1 3437 6 1013 4 4052 7 1167 3 4667 V752 124 818 1 245 2 978 Did you (or anyone in your household) have any later contact with the police about the incident? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 8 Residue 2 399 1 1593 3 552 4 2208 4 706 3 2823 5 860 2 3438 6 1014 1 4053 7 1167 4 4668 Page 288 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V753 125 819 1 245 3 979 Did the police get in touch with you or did you get in touch with them? 1 Police contacted respondent or other household member 2 Respondent (or other household member) contacted police 3 Both 4 Don't know 5 Other 8 Residue 2 399 2 1594 3 553 1 2209 4 706 4 2824 5 860 3 3439 6 1014 2 4054 7 1168 1 4669 V754 126 820 1 245 4 980 Was that in person, by phone, or some other way? 1 In person 2 Not in person (by phone, mail, etc.) 3 Both in person and not in person 4 Don't know 8 Residue 2 399 3 1595 3 553 2 2210 4 707 1 2825 5 860 4 3440 6 1014 3 4055 7 1168 2 4670 127 821-822 What did the police do in following up this incident? Anything else? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-9. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-9. Page 289 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V755 V756V764 12 (cont.) 821-822 (cont.) Lead-in code locations NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. ___________ Category Codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. ______________ 1 Took report 2 Questioned witnesses or suspects 3 Did or promised surveillance/investigat ion 4 Recovered property 5 Made arrest 6 Stayed in touch with respondent/household 7 Other 8 Nothing (to respondent's knowledge) 9 Don't know 1 246 1 981 2 399 4 1596 3 553 3 2211 4 707 2 2826 5 861 1 3441 6 1014 4 4056 7 1168 3 4671 Category code locations 1 246 2-4 982 -984 247 1-4 985 -988 248 1-2 989 -990 2 400 1-4 1597 -1600 401 1-4 1601 -1604 402 1 1605 3 553 4 2212 554 1-4 2213 -2216 555 1-4 2217 -2220 4 707 3-4 2827 -2828 708 1-4 2829 -2832 709 1-3 2833 -2835 5 861 2-4 3442 -3444 862 1-4 3445 -3448 863 1-2 3449 -3450 Page 290 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V765 127 (cont.) 821-822 (cont.) 6 1015 1-4 4057 -4060 Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 1016 1-4 4061 -4064 1017 1 4065 7 1168 4 4672 1169 1-4 4673 -4676 1170 1-4 4677 -4680 Residue code locations 1 248 3 991 2 402 2 1606 3 556 1 2221 4 709 4 2836 5 863 3 3451 6 1017 2 4066 7 1171 1 4681 V766 128 825 1 248 4 992 Did you (or someone in your household) sign a complaint against the offender(s) to the police department or the authorities? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue 2 402 3 1607 3 556 2 2222 4 710 1 2837 5 863 4 3452 6 1017 3 4067 7 1171 2 4682 Page 291 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V767 129 826 1 249 1 993 As far as you know, was anyone arrested or were charges brought against anyone in connection with this incident? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 8 Residue 2 402 4 1608 3 556 3 2223 4 710 2 2838 5 864 1 3453 6 1017 4 4068 7 1171 3 4683 V768 130 827 1 249 2 994 Did you (or someone in your household) receive any help or advice from any office or agency -other than the police - that deals with victims of crime? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 8 Residue 2 403 1 1609 3 556 4 2224 4 710 3 2839 5 864 2 3454 6 1018 1 4069 7 1171 4 4684 V769 131 828 1 249 3 995 Was that a government or a private agency? 1 Government 2 Private 3 Don't know 8 Residue 2 403 2 1610 3 557 1 2225 4 710 4 2840 5 864 3 3455 6 1018 2 4070 7 1172 1 4685 V770 132 829 1 249 4 996 Have you (or someone in your household) had contact with any other authorities about this incident (such as a prosecutor, court, or juvenile officer)? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 8 Residue 2 403 3 1611 3 557 2 2226 4 711 1 2841 5 864 3 3456 6 1018 3 4071 7 1172 2 4686 Page 292 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 133 830 Which authorities? Any others? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-5. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-5. NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. Page 293 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V771 V772V776 133 830 Lead-in code locations Category Codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. ______________ 1 Prosecutor, district attorney 2 Magistrate 3 Court 4 Juvenile, probation or parole officer 5 Other ________________ Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 1 250 1 997 2 403 4 1612 3 557 3 2227 4 711 2 2842 5 865 1 3457 6 1018 4 4072 7 1172 3 4687 Category code locations 1 250 2-4 998 -1000 251 1-2 1001 -1002 2 404 1-4 1613 -1616 405 1 1617 3 557 4 2228 558 1-4 2229 -2232 4 711 3-4 2843 -2844 712 1-3 2845 -2847 5 865 2-4 3458 -3460 866 1-2 3461 -3462 6 1019 1-4 4073 -4076 1020 1 4077 7 1172 4 4688 1173 1-4 4689 -4692 V777 133 (cont.) 830 (cont.) Residue code locations 1 251 3 1003 2 405 2 1618 Page 294 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 3 559 1 2233 4 712 4 2848 5 866 3 3463 6 1020 2 4078 7 1174 1 4693 V778 134 831 1 251 4 1004 Do you expect the police, courts, or other authorities will be doing anything further in connection with this incident? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 8 Residue 2 405 3 1619 3 559 2 2234 4 713 1 2849 5 866 4 3464 6 1020 3 4079 7 1174 2 4694 135 832 What were you doing when this incident (happened/started)? 01 Working or on duty 02 On the way to or from work 03 On the way to or from school 04 On the way to or from other place 05 Shopping, errands 06 Attending school 07 Leisure activity away from home Page 295 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V779 135 (cont.) 832 (cont.) 1 252 1-2 1005 -1006 What were you doing when this incident (happened/started)? (cont.) 08 Sleeping 09 Other activities at home 10 Other 11 Don't know 95 Don't know if code 03 (On the way to or from school) or code 04 (On the way to or from other place) 96 Don't know if code 05-11 98 Residue 2 405 406 4 1 1620 1621 3 559 3-4 2235 -2236 4 713 2-3 2850 -2851 5 867 1-2 3465 -3466 6 1020 1021 4 1 4080 4081 7 1174 3-4 4695 -4696 V780 136 840 1 252 3 1007 Did you have a job at the time of the incident? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue 2 406 2 1622 3 560 1 2237 4 713 4 2852 5 867 3 3467 6 1021 2 4082 7 1175 1 4697 V781 137 841 1 252 4 1008 What was your major activity the week of the incident - were you looking for work, keeping house, going to school, or doing something else? 1 Looking for work 2 Keeping house 3 Going to school 4 Unable to work 5 Retired 6 Other 8 Residue 2 406 3 1623 3 560 2 2238 4 714 1 2853 5 867 4 3468 6 1021 3 4083 7 1175 2 4698 Page 296 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V782 138 842 1 253 1-2 1009 -1010 Which of the following best describes your job at the time of the incident? Medical Profession - As a 01 Physician 02 Nurse 03 Technician 04 Other Mental Health Services Field - Are your duties - 05 Professional (social worker/psychiatrist) 06 Custodial care 07 Other Teaching Profession - Were you employed in a 08 Preschool 09 Elementary 10 Junior high or middle school 11 High school 12 College or university 13 Technical or industrial school 14 Special education facility 15 Other Law Enforcement or Security Field Were you employed as a - 16 Law enforcement officer 17 Prison or jail guard 18 Security guard 19 Other 2 406 407 4 1 1624 1625 3 560 3-4 2239 -2240 4 714 2-3 2854 -2855 5 868 1-2 3469 -3470 6 1021 1022 4 1 4084 4085 7 1175 3-4 4699 -4700 Page 297 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 138 (cont.) 842 (cont.) Retail Sales - Were you employed as a -20 Convenience or liquor store clerk 21 Gas station attendant 22 Bartender 23 Other Transportation Field - Were you employed as a 24 Bus driver 25 Taxi cab driver 26 Other OR 27 Something else V783 139 843 1 253 3 1011 Was your job with 1 A private company, business, or individual for wages? 2 The Federal government? 3 A State, county, or local government? 4 Yourself (Selfemployed) in your own business, professional practice, or farm? 8 Residue 2 407 2 1626 3 561 1 2241 4 714 4 2856 5 868 3 3471 6 1022 2 4086 7 1176 1 4701 Page 298 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V784 140 844 1 253 4 1012 While working at this job, did you work mostly in 1 A city? 2 Suburban area? 3 Rural area? 4 Combination of any of these? 8 Residue 2 407 3 1627 3 561 2 2242 4 715 1 2857 5 868 4 3472 6 1022 3 4087 7 1176 2 4702 V785 141 845 1 254 1 1013 Did this incident happen at your work site? 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don't know 4 Other 8 Residue 2 407 4 1628 3 561 3 2243 4 715 2 2858 5 869 1 3473 6 1022 4 4088 7 1176 3 4703 V786 142 846 1 254 2 1014 Did you usually work days or nights? 1 Days 2 Nights 3 Both days and nights/rotating shifts 8 Residue 2 408 1 1629 3 561 4 2244 4 715 3 2859 5 869 2 3474 6 1023 1 4089 7 1176 4 4704 V787 143 870 1 254 3 1015 Did you lose time from work because of the injuries you suffered in this incident? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue 2 408 2 1630 3 562 1 2245 4 715 4 2860 5 869 3 3475 6 1023 2 4090 Page 299 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 7 1177 1 4705 V788 144 871 1 254 4 1016 How much time did you lose because of injuries? 000 Less than one day 001-200 Actual number of days 997 Don't know 998 Residue 255 1-2 1017 -1018 2 408 3-4 1631 -1632 409 1 1633 3 562 2-4 2246 -2248 4 716 1-3 2861 -2863 5 869 4 3476 870 1-2 3477 -3478 6 1023 3-4 4091 -4092 1024 1 4093 7 1177 2-4 4706 -4708 V789 145 872 1 255 3 1019 During these days, did you lose any pay that was not covered by unemployment insurance, sick leave, or some other source? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue 2 409 2 1634 3 563 1 2249 4 716 4 2864 5 870 3 3479 6 1024 2 4094 7 1178 1 4709 Page 300 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V790 146 873 1 255 4 1020 About how much pay did you lose? 00001-99996 Actual whole dollar amount 99997 Don't know 99998 Residue 256 1-4 1021 -1024 2 409 3-4 1635 -1636 410 1-3 1637 -1639 3 563 2-4 2250 -2252 564 1-2 2253 -2254 4 717 1-4 2865 -2868 718 1 2869 5 870 4 3480 871 1-4 3481 -3484 6 1024 3-4 4095 -4096 1025 1-3 4097 -4099 7 1178 2-4 4710 -4712 1179 1-2 4713 -4714 Page 301 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V791 V792V797 147 874 Lead-in code locations Did you lose any (other) time from work because of this incident for such things as cooperating with a police investigation, testifying in court, or repairing or replacing damaged or stolen property? Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-6. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-6. NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. Category Codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 1 257 1 1025 2 410 4 1640 3 564 3 2255 4 718 2 2870 5 872 1 3485 6 1025 4 4100 7 1181 2 4715 Category code locations 1 257 2-4 1026 -1028 258 1-3 1029 -1031 2 411 1-4 1641 -1644 412 1-2 1645 -1646 3 564 4 2256 565 1-4 2257 -2260 566 1 2261 4 718 3-4 2871 -2872 719 1-4 2873 -2876 5 872 2-4 3486 -3488 873 1-3 3489 -3491 Page 302 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V798 147 (cont.) 874 (cont.) 6 1026 1-4 4101 -4104 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. 1 Police related activities 2 Court related activities 3 Repairing damaged property 4 Replacing stolen items 5 Other 6 None (did not lose time from work for any of these reasons) Residue Codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The item contains one or more out of range entries 1027 1-2 4105 -4106 7 1179 4 4716 1180 1-4 4717 -4720 1181 1 4721 Residue code locations 1 258 4 1032 2 412 3 1647 3 566 2 2262 4 720 1 2877 5 873 4 3492 6 1027 3 4107 7 1181 2 4722 V799 148 875 1 259 1-3 1033 -1035 How much time did you lose altogether because of (name all reasons marked in item 147)? 000 Less than one day 001-200 Actual number of days 997 Don't know 998 Residue 2 412 4 1648 413 1-2 1649 -1650 3 566 3-4 2263 -2264 567 1 2265 4 720 2-4 2878 -2880 5 874 1-3 3493 -3495 Page 303 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 148 (cont.) 875 (cont.) 6 1027 4 4108 1028 1-2 4109 -4110 7 1181 3-4 4723 -4724 1182 1 4725 V800 149 876 1 259 4 1036 During these days, did you lose any pay that was not covered by unemployment insurance, paid leave, or some other source? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue 2 413 3 1651 3 567 2 2266 4 721 1 2881 5 874 4 3496 6 1028 3 4111 7 1182 2 4726 V801 150 877 1 260 1-4 1037 -1040 About how much pay did you lose? 00001-99996 Actual whole dollar amount 99997 Don't know 99998 Residue 261 1 1041 2 413 4 1652 414 1-4 1653 -1656 3 567 3-4 2267 -2268 568 1-3 2269 -2271 4 721 2-4 2882 -2884 722 1-2 2885 -2886 5 875 1-4 3497 -3500 876 1 3501 6 1028 4 4112 1029 1-4 4113 -4116 7 1182 3-4 4727 -4728 1183 1-3 4729 -4731 Page 304 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V802 151 878 1 261 2 1042 Were there any (other) household members 16 years or older who lost time from work because of this incident? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue 2 415 1 1657 3 568 4 2272 4 722 3 2887 5 876 2 3502 6 1030 1 4117 7 1183 4 4732 V803 152 879 1 261 3-4 1043 -1044 How much time did they lose altogether? 000 Less than one day 001-200 Actual number of days 997 Don't know 998 Residue 262 1 1045 2 415 2-4 1658 -1660 3 569 1-3 2273 -2275 4 722 4 2888 723 1-2 2889 -2890 5 876 3-4 3503 -3504 877 1 3505 6 1030 2-4 4118 -4120 7 1184 1-3 4733 -4735 Page 305 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V804 153 881 1 262 2-3 1046 -1047 You told me earlier you were on the way (to/from)(work/school/ some place) when the incident happened. What means of transportation were you using? 01 Car, truck or van 02 Motorcycle 03 Bicycle 04 On foot 05 School bus (private or public) 06 Bus or trolley 07 Subway or rapid transit 08 Train 09 Taxi 10 Other 98 Residue 2 416 1-2 1661 -1662 3 569 4 2276 570 1 2277 4 723 3-4 2891 -2892 5 877 2-3 3506 -3507 6 1031 1-2 4121 -4122 7 1184 4 4736 1185 1 4737 V805 154 883 1 262 4 1048 You have told me about the most recent incident. How many times did this kind of thing happen to you during the last 6 months? 006-996 Number of incidents 998 Residue 263 1-2 1049 -1050 2 416 3-4 1663 -1664 417 1 1665 3 570 2-4 2278 -2280 4 724 1-3 2893 -2895 5 877 4 3508 878 1-2 3509 -3510 154 (cont.) 883 (cont.) 6 1031 3-4 4123 -4124 1032 1 4125 7 1185 2-4 4738 -4740 Page 306 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V806 154 884 1 263 3 1051 Is that because there is no way of knowing, or because it happened too many times, or is there some other reason? 1 No way of knowing 2 Happened too many times 3 Some other reason 8 Residue 2 417 2 1666 3 571 1 2281 4 724 4 2896 5 878 3 3511 6 1032 2 4126 7 1186 1 4741 V807 155 885 1 263 4 1052 (In what month or months did these incidents take place?) Number of incidents in Quarter 1 00 None 01-96 Actual number of incidents [January, February, or March (Quarter 1)] 98 Residue 264 1 1053 2 417 3-4 1667 -1668 3 571 2-3 2282 -2283 4 725 1-2 2897 -2898 5 878 4 3512 879 1 3513 6 1032 3-4 4127 -4128 7 1186 2-3 4742 -4743 V808 155 886 1 264 2-3 1054 -1055 (In what month or months did these incidents take place?) Number of incidents in Quarter 2 00 None 01-96 Actual number of incidents [April, May, or June (Quarter 2)] 98 Residue 2 418 1-2 1669 -1670 3 571 4 2284 572 1 2285 4 725 3-4 2899 -2900 Page 307 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 5 879 2-3 3514 -3515 6 1033 1-2 4129 -4130 7 1186 4 4744 1187 1 4745 V809 155 887 1 264 4 1056 (In what month or months did these incidents take place?) Number of incidents in Quarter 3 00 None 01-96 Actual number of incidents [July, August, or September (Quarter 3)] 98 Residue 265 1 1057 2 418 3-4 1671 -1672 3 572 2-3 2286 -2287 4 726 1-2 2901 -2902 5 879 4 3516 880 1 3517 155 (cont.) 887 (cont.) 6 1033 3-4 4131 -4132 7 1187 2-3 4746 -4747 Page 308 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V810 155 888 1 265 2-3 1058 -1059 (In what month or months did these incidents take place?) Number of incidents in Quarter 4 00 None 01-96 Actual number of incidents [October, November, or December (Quarter 4)] 98 Residue 2 419 1-2 1673 -1674 3 572 4 2288 573 1 2289 4 726 3-4 2903 -2904 5 880 2-3 3518 -3519 6 1034 1-2 4133 -4134 7 1187 4 4748 1188 1 4749 V811 156 889 1 265 4 1060 Did all, some, or none of these incidents occur in the same place? 1 All in the same place 2 Some in the same place 3 None in the same place 8 Residue 2 419 3 1675 3 573 2 2290 4 727 1 2905 5 880 4 3520 6 1034 3 4135 7 1188 2 4750 Page 309 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V812 157 890 1 266 1 1061 Were all, some, or none of these incidents done by the same person(s)? 1 All by same person 2 Some by same person 3 None by same person 4 Don't know 8 Residue 2 419 4 1676 3 573 3 2291 4 727 2 2906 5 881 1 3521 6 1034 4 4136 7 1188 3 4751 158 891-892 What (was/were) the offender(s) relationship(s) to you? For example, friend, spouse, schoolmate, etc. Lead-in code 1 At least one good entry in one or more of the answer category codes 1-10. 8 No good entry (out of range) in any of the answer category codes 1-10. NOTE: For a "Yes-NA" entry, the lead-in code is equal to 1, the category codes are equal to 0 and the residue code is equal to 8. Page 310 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V813 V814V823 158 (cont.) 891-892 (cont.) Lead-in code locations Category Codes 1 Indicates an entry in the following category positions. 0 Indicates no entry in the following category positions. 8 Indicates an "NA" when ALL of the following category positions are blank. ______________ Relative 1 Spouse at time of incident 2 Ex-spouse at time of incident 3 Parent or step-parent 4 Other relative Nonrelative 5 Friend or ex-friend 6 Neighbor 7 Schoolmate 8 Roommate, boarder 9 Stranger 10 Other Nonrelative _________________ 1 266 2 1062 2 420 1 1677 3 573 4 2292 4 727 3 2907 5 881 2 3522 6 1035 1 4137 7 1188 4 4752 Category code locations 1 266 3-4 1063 -1064 267 1-4 1065 -1068 268 1-4 1069 -1072 2 420 2-4 1678 -1680 421 1-4 1681 -1684 422 1-3 1685 -1687 3 574 1-4 2293 -2296 575 1-4 2297 -2300 576 1-2 2301 -2302 4 727 4 2908 728 1-4 2909 -2912 729 1-4 2913 -2916 730 1 2917 5 881 3-4 3523 -3524 882 1-4 3525 -3528 883 1-4 3529 -3532 Page 311 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V824 158 (cont.) 891-892 (cont.) 6 1035 2-4 4138 -4140 Residue codes 0 The item contains no out of range entries 8 The items contains one or more out of range entries 1036 1-4 4141 -4144 1037 1-3 4145 -4147 7 1189 1-4 4753 -4756 1190 1-4 4757 -4760 1191 1-2 4761 -4762 Residue code locations 1 269 1 1073 2 422 4 1688 3 576 3 2303 4 730 2 2918 5 884 1 3533 6 1037 4 4148 7 1191 3 4763 V825 159 893 1 269 2 1074 Did the same thing happen each time? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue 2 423 1 1689 3 576 4 2304 4 730 3 2919 5 884 2 3534 6 1038 1 4149 7 1191 4 4764 V826 160 894 1 269 3 1075 Is the trouble still going on? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue 2 423 2 1690 3 577 1 2305 4 730 4 2920 Page 312 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 160 (cont.) 894 (cont.) 5 884 3 3535 6 1038 2 4150 7 1192 1 4765 V827 Check Item V1 895 1 269 270 4 1 1076 1077 Check Item V1 Mark the ONE category that best describes this series of crimes. Contact crimes 01 Completed or threatened violence in the course of the victim's job (police officer, security guard, psychiatric social worker, etc.) 02 Completed or threatened11 violence between spouses, other relatives, friends, neighbors, etc. 03 Completed or threatened violence at school or on school property 04 Other contact crimes (other violence, pocket picking, purse snatching, etc.) Noncontact crimes 05 Theft or attempted theft of motor vehicle 2 423 3-4 1691 -1692 3 577 2-3 2306 -2307 4 731 1-2 2921 -2922 5 884 885 4 1 3536 3537 6 1038 3-4 4151 -4152 7 1192 2-3 4766 -4767 Page 313 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES Check Item V1 (cont.) 895 (cont.) Noncontact crimes (cont.) 06 Theft or attempted theft of motor vehicle parts (tire, hubcap, battery, attached tape deck, etc.) 07 Theft or attempted theft of contents of motor vehicle, including unattached parts 08 Theft or attempted at school or on school property 09 Illegal entry of, or attempt to enter, victim's home, other building on property, second home, hotel, motel 10 Theft or attempted theft from victim's home or vicinity by person(s) known to victim (roommate, babysitter, etc.) 11 Theft or attempted theft from victim's home or vicinity by person(s) unknown to victim 12 Other theft or attempted theft (at work, while shopping, etc.) 98 Residue Page 314 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V828 TOC CODE (OLD) 1 270 2-3 1078 -1079 Type of Crime Code (OLD) Violent Crimes 01 Completed Rape 02 Attempted Rape 03 Sexual Attack with Serious Assault 04 Sexual Attack with Minor Assault 05 Completed Robbery with Injury from Serious Assault 06 Completed Robbery with Injury from Minor Assault 07 Completed Robbery without Injury 08 Attempted Robbery with Injury from Serious Assault 09 Attempted Robbery with Injury from Minor Assault 10 Attempted Robbery without Injury 11 Completed Aggravated Assault with Injury 12 Attempted Aggravated Assault with Weapon 13 Threatened Assault with Weapon 14 Simple Assault Completed with Injury 15 Sexual Assault without Injury * 16 Unwanted Sexual Contact without Force 17 Assault without Weapon without Injury 18 Verbal Threat of Rape 2 424 1-2 1693 -1694 3 577 4 2308 578 1 2309 4 731 3-4 2923 -2924 5 885 2-3 3538 -3539 6 1039 1-2 4153 -4154 7 1192 4 4768 Page 315 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 1193 1 4769 TOC CODE (OLD) (cont.) Violent Crimes (cont.) 19 Verbal Threat of Sexual Assault 20 Verbal Threat of Assault *NOTE: TOC 16 did not exist during Quarters 1 and 2, 1992. Comparisons of the 1992 data for TOC 16 with future years should be avoided. Personal Theft 21 Completed Purse Snatching 22 Attempted Purse Snatching 23 Pocket Picking (completed only) 24 Completed Personal Larceny without Contact Less than $10 25 Completed Personal Larceny without Contact $10 to $49 26 Completed Personal Larceny without Contact $50 to $249 27 Completed Personal Larceny without Contact $250 or greater 28 Completed Personal Larceny without Contact Value NA 29 Attempted Personal Larceny without Contact Household Crimes 31 Completed Burglary, Forcible Entry Page 316 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES TOC CODE (OLD) (cont.) Household Crimes (cont.) 32 Completed Burglary, Unlawful Entry without Force 33 Attempted Forcible Entry 34 Completed Household Larceny Less than $10 35 Completed Household Larceny $10 to $49 36 Completed Household Larceny $50 to $249 37 Completed Household Larceny $250 or Greater 38 Completed Household Larceny Value NA 39 Attempted Household Larceny 40 Completed Motor Vehicle Theft 41 Attempted Motor Vehicle Theft TOC CODE (NEW) Violent Crimes 01 Completed Rape 02 Attempted Rape 03 Sexual Attack with Serious Assault 04 Sexual Attack with Minor Assault 05 Completed Robbery with Injury from Serious Assault 06 Completed Robbery with Injury from Minor Assault 07 Completed Robbery without Injury Page 317 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V829 TOC CODE (NEW) 1 270 271 4 1 1080 1081 Violent Crimes (cont.) 08 Attempted Robbery with Injury from Serious Assault 09 Attempted Robbery with Injury from Minor Assault 10 Attempted Robbery without Injury 11 Completed Aggravated Assault with Injury 12 Attempted Aggravated Assault with Weapon 13 Threatened Assault with Weapon 14 Simple Assault Completed with Injury 15 Sexual Assault without Injury * 16 Unwanted Sexual Contact without Force 17 Assault without Weapon without Injury 18 Verbal Threat of Rape 19 Verbal Threat of Sexual Assault 20 Verbal Threat of Assault *NOTE: TOC 16 did not exist during Quarters 1 and 2, 1992. Comparisons of the 1992 data for TOC 16 with future years should be avoided. 2 424 3-4 1695 -1696 3 578 2-3 2310 -2311 4 732 1-2 2925 -2926 5 885 886 4 1 3540 3541 6 1039 3-4 4155 -4156 7 1193 2-3 4770 -4771 Page 318 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES TOC CODE (NEW) (cont.) Purse Snatching/Pocket Picking 21 Completed Purse Snatching 22 Attempted Purse Snatching 23 Pocket Picking (completed only) Property Crimes 31 Completed Burglary, Forcible Entry 32 Completed Burglary, Unlawful Entry without Force 33 Attempted Forcible Entry 40 Completed Motor Vehicle Theft 41 Attempted Motor Vehicle Theft 54 Completed Theft Less Than $10 55 Completed Theft $10 to $49 56 Completed Theft $50 to $249 57 Completed Theft $250 or greater 58 Completed Theft Value NA 59 Attempted Theft NOTE: Theft represents crimes previously classified as personal larceny without contact and household larceny. Page 319 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES V830 INCIDENT FLAG 1 271 2 1082 Incident Flag 2 Incidents that could not be matched to a person record. 2 425 1 1697 3 578 4 2312 4 732 3 2927 5 886 2 3542 6 1040 1 4157 7 1193 4 4772 V831 17a 628 1 271 3 1083 Was it your school? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue 2 425 2 1698 3 579 1 2313 4 732 4 2928 5 886 3 3543 6 1040 2 4158 7 1194 1 4773 V832 17b 629 1 271 4 1084 In what part of the school building did it happen? 1 Classroom 2 Hallway/Stairwell 3 Bathroom/Locker Room 4 Other (library/gym/ auditorium/cafeteria) 8 Residue 2 425 3 1699 3 579 2 2314 4 733 1 2929 5 886 4 3544 6 1040 3 4159 7 1194 2 4774 V833 9 633 Note: This source code was added to the NCVS beginning July 1999. 1 272 1 1085 Did this incident occur on an Indian Reservation or on Indian Lands? 1 Yes 2 No 8 Residue 2 425 4 1700 3 579 3 2315 4 733 2 2930 5 887 1 3545 Page 320 V ITEM SOURCE CODE INC WORD DIGIT CHARACTER ITEM AND CODES 6 1040 4 4160 7 1194 3 4775 V834 4 Digit Year Note: This SC was added beginning July 1999 to address the Year 2000 problem. 1 272 2-4 1086 -1088 Four Digit Year 2000 Year 2000 2001 Year 2001 9998 Residue 273 1 1089 2 426 1-4 1701 -1704 3 579 4 2316 580 1-3 2317 -2319 4 733 3-4 2931 -2932 734 1-2 2933 -2934 5 887 2-4 3546 -3548 888 1 3549 6 1041 1-4 4161 -4164 7 1194 4 4776 1195 1-3 4777 -4779 Blank 1195 4 4780 Blank Page 321 NOTICE – Your report to the Census Bureau is confidential by law (U.S. Code 42, Sections 3789g and 3735). All identifiable information will be used only by persons engaged in and for the purposes of the survey, and may not be disclosed or released to others for any purpose. BEFORE INTERVIEW – TRANSCRIBE FROM CONTROL CARD Sample (cc item 1) J ____ Control number (cc item 2) PSU Segment CK. Serial ITEMS FILLED AT START OF INTERVIEW 1. Field representative identification Code Name 2. Unit status HH No. (cc item 3) 1 Unit in sample the previous enumeration period – Fill 3 2 Unit in sample first time this period – SKIP to 4 3. Household status – Mark first box that applies. 203 1 Same household interviewed the previous enumeration 2 Replacement household since the previous enumeration 3 Noninterview the previous enumeration 4 Other – Specify 4. Line number of household respondent ____________ Go to page 2 AFTER INTERVIEW – TRANSCRIBE FROM CONTROL CARD 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. Special place/GQ type code (cc item 6d) Tenure (cc item 8a) Owned or 2 being bought Land use (cc item 9) Urban 2 Farm sales (cc item 10) Item blank 1 Rented 3 No cash for cash rent Rural $1,000 2 Less than or more $1,000 Type of living quarters (cc items 11c and 11d) Housing unit House, apartment, flat OMB No. 1121-0111: Approval Expires 05/15/2003 FORM NCVS-1 (4-24-2000) U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE Economics and Statistics Administration U.S. CENSUS BUREAU ACTING AS COLLECTING AGENT FOR THE BUREAU OF JUSTICE STATISTICS U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE NATIONAL CRIME VICTIMIZATION SURVEY NCVS-1 BASIC SCREEN QUESTIONNAIRE AFTER INTERVIEW – TRANSCRIBE FROM CONTROL CARD – Cont. 12a. Household Income (cc item 28) 214 1 Less than $5,000 6 15,000 – 17,499 11 2 $5,000 – 7,499 7 17,500 – 19,999 12 3 7,500 – 9,999 8 20,000 – 24,999 13 4 10,000 – 12,499 9 25,000 – 29,999 14 5 12,500 – 14,999 10 30,000 – 34,999 12b. College/University (cc item 8b) No218 1 Yes 2 12c. Public Housing (cc item 8c) X Item blank 1 Yes (public 2 housing) 219 35,000 – 39,999 40,000 – 49,999 50,000 – 74,999 75,000 and over No (not public housing) 12d. Manager Verification of Public Housing (cc item 8d) 220 X Item blank Able to verify Unable to verify 1 Public housing 3 CATI/Telephone 2 Not public housing 4 Other – Specify 12e. Indian Reservation or Indian Lands (cc item 8e) No221 1 Yes 2 ITEMS FILLED DURING AND/OR AFTER INTERVIEW 13. Proxy information – Fill for all proxy interviews a. Proxy inter-b. Proxy respondentview obtained for Line No. Name Line No. 301 302 304 305 307 308 310 311 Codes for item 13c c. Reason (Entercode) 303 306 309 312 1 – 12-13 years old and parent refused permission for self interview N C V S 1 2 – Physically/mentally unable to answer HU in nontransient hotel, motel, etc. HU permanent in transient hotel, motel, etc. 3 – TA and won’t return before closeout ... FILL INTER-COMM 4 HU in rooming house 14. Type Z noninterview 5 Mobile home or trailer with no permanent room added Codes for item 14ba. Interview not b. Reason 6 Mobile home or trailer with one or more permanent obtained for (Enterrooms added Line No. code) 7 HU not specified above – Describe 313 314 1 – Never available 2 – Refused . . . 3 – Physically/ mentally FILL ... unable to INTER-answer — no 315 316OTHER unit 8 Quarters not HU in rooming or boarding house 9 Unit not permanent in transient hotel, motel, etc. 10 Unoccupied site for mobile home, trailer, or tent 11 Student quarters in college dormitory 12 OTHER unit not specified above – Describe Use of telephone (cc item 26a and b) 317 319 318 320 COMMproxy available 4 – TA and no proxy available . . 5 –Other .... 6 – Office use only . Complete 17—28 for each Line No. in 14a 15a. Household members 12 years of age and OVER 321 ____________ Total number 15b. Household members UNDER 12 years of age10a. Location of phone – Mark first box that applies. Phone in unit .................... 322 ____________ Total number 0Fill 10b None 15c. Crime Incident Reports filled Phone in common area (hallway, etc.) .. Phone in another unit (neighbor, friend, etc.) Work/office phone .............. No phone – SKIP to 11a 10b. Is phone interview acceptable? (cc item 26d) 211 1 Yes 2 No 3 Refused to give number 11a. Number of housing units in structure (cc item 27a) 212 1 1 – SKIP to 12a 4 4 7 Mobile home or 2 2 5 5–9 trailer – SKIP to 12a 3 3 6 10+ 8 Only OTHER units 11b. Direct outside access (cc item 27b) 213 1 Yes 2 No 3 DK X Item blank 323 ____________ Total number of NCVS-2s filled 0 None 16. Changes in Household Composition (cc item 25a) a. Line No. 324 326 328 330 b. Reason (Enter code) 325 327 329 331 Only transcribe changes discovered during the current enumeration Fill BOUNDING INFORMATION 3 Per. – Proxy HOUSEHOLD RESPONDENT’S PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS 17. NAME (of household respondent) Last First Type of interview Line No. 401 1 2 Per. – Self-respondent Tel. – Self-respondent 18. 19. 402 ...Fill 13 on cover pageTel. – Proxy4 Line No. AFTER INTERVIEW – TRANSCRIBE FROM CONTROL CARD 20. 21. 22a. 22b. 23. 24. 25a. 25b. 26. 27. 28. (cc 13b) (cc 17) (cc 18) (From previous (cc 19) (cc 20) (cc 21a) (cc 21b) (cc 22) (cc 23) (cc 24) Relationship to Age last Marital status enumeration) Sex Armed Education Education Attending Race His-reference birthday THIS survey Marital Forces -highest -complete school panic person period status LAST member grade that year? origin survey period 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 Husband Wife Son Daughter Father Mother Brother Sister Other relative Nonrelative Ref. person 404 Age 29. Date of interview 405 1 Married 2 Widowed 3 Divorced 4 Separated 5 Never married 406 1 Married 2 Widowed 3 Divorced 4 Separated 5 Never married 6 Not interviewed last survey period 407 1 M 2 F 408 1 Yes 2 No 409 Grade 501 410 1 Yes 2 No Month Day 411 0 Regular school 1 College/ University 2 Trade school 3 Vocational school 4 None of the above schools Year 412 1 White 2 Black 3 Amer. Indian, Aleut, Eskimo 4 Asian, Pacific Islander 5 Other 1 Yes 2 No MOBILITY QUESTIONS Before we get to the crime questions, I have some questions that are helpful in studying where and why crimes occur. If unsure, ASK OR VERIFY – 33a. How long have you lived at this address? (Enter number of months OR years.) 505 ____________ Months (1-11) – SKIP to 33b OR 506 ____________ Years (Round to nearest whole year) – Fill Check Item A CHECK ITEM A 5 years or more – SKIP to 34How many years are entered in 33a? Less than 5 years – Ask 33b 33b. Altogether, how many times have you moved in the last 5085 years, that is, since _________________, 19 ___? ____________ Number of times BUSINESS OPERATED FROM SAMPLE ADDRESS 34. Does anyone in this household operate a business from this address? PERSONAL – Fill by observation. TELEPHONE – Ask. 35. Is there a sign on the premises or some other indication to the general public that a business is operated from this address? 530 1 Yes – Go to 35 2 No – SKIP to 36a 531 1 Yes (Recognizable business) 2 No (Unrecognizable business) FORM NCVS-1 (4-24-2000)Page 2 HOUSEHOLD RESPONDENT’S SCREEN QUESTIONS 36a. I’m going to read some examples that will give you an idea of the kinds of crimes this study covers. As I go through them, tell me if any of these happened to you in the last 6 months, that is since __________ ______, 20 ____. Was something belonging to YOU stolen, such as – (a) Things that you carry, like luggage, a wallet, purse, briefcase, book – (b) Clothing, jewelry, or calculator – (c) Bicycle or sports equipment – (d) Things in your home – like a TV, stereo, or tools (e) Things outside your home such as a garden hose or lawn furniture – (f) Things belonging to children in the household – (g) Things from a vehicle, such as a package, groceries, camera, or cassette tapes – OR (h) Did anyone ATTEMPT to steal anything belonging to you? 37a. (Other than any incidents already mentioned,) has anyone – (a) Broken in or ATTEMPTED to break into your home by forcing a door or window, pushing past someone, jimmying a lock, cutting a screen, or entering through an open door or window? (b) Has anyone illegally gotten in or tried to get into a garage, shed or storage room? OR (c) Illegally gotten in or tried to get into a hotel or motel room or vacation home where you were staying? Briefly describe incident(s) Briefly describe incident(s) 36b. Did any incidents of this type happen to you? MARK OR ASK – 36c. How many times? 1 Yes – What happened?532 Number of times (36c) 533 No – SKIP to 37a2 Describe above 37b. Did any incidents of this type happen to you? MARK OR ASK – 37c. How many times? 1 Yes – What happened?534 Number of times (37c) 535 No – SKIP to 382 Describe above FORM NCVS-1 (4-24-2000) Page 3 HOUSEHOLD RESPONDENT’S SCREEN QUESTIONS 38. What was the TOTAL number of cars, vans, trucks, motorcycles, or other motor vehicles owned by you or any other member of this household during the last 6 months? Include those you no longer own. 39a. During the last 6 months, (other than any incidents already mentioned,) (was the vehicle/were any of thevehicles) – (a) Stolen or used without permission? (b) Did anyone steal any parts such as a tire, tape deck, hubcap or battery? (c) Did anyone steal any gas from (it/them)? OR (d) Did anyone ATTEMPT to steal any vehicle or parts attached to (it/them)? MARK OR ASK – 39b. Did any incidents of this type happen to you? 39c. How many times? 40a. (Other than any incidents already mentioned,) since __________ ______, 20 ____, were you attacked or threatened OR did you have something stolen from you – (a) At home including the porch or yard – (b) At or near a friend’s, relative’s, or neighbor’s home – (c) At work or school – (d) In places such as a storage shed or laundry room, a shopping mall, restaurant, bank, or airport – (e) While riding in any vehicle – (f) On the street or in a parking lot – (g) At such places as a party, theater, gym, picnic area, bowling lanes, or while fishing or hunting – OR (h) Did anyone ATTEMPT to attack or ATTEMPT to steal anything belonging to you from any of these places? MARK OR ASK – 40b. Did any incidents of this type happen to you? 40c. How many times? 536 0 1 2 3 4 Briefly describe incident(s) 537 1 2 538 Briefly describe incident(s) 539 1 2 540 None – SKIP to 40a 1 2 3 4 or more Yes – What happened? Describe above No – SKIP to 40a Number of times (39c) Yes – What happened? Describe above No – SKIP to 41a Number of times (40c) FORM NCVS-1 (4-24-2000)Page 4 HOUSEHOLD RESPONDENT’S SCREEN QUESTIONS 41a. (Other than any incidents already mentioned,) has anyone attacked or threatened you in any of these ways (Exclude telephone threats) – (a) With any weapon, for instance, a gun or knife – (b) With anything like a baseball bat, frying pan, scissors, or stick – (c) By something thrown, such as a rock or bottle – (d) Include any grabbing, punching, or choking, (e) Any rape, attempted rape or other type of sexual attack – (f) Any face to face threats – OR (g) Any attack or threat or use of force by anyone at all? Please mention it even if you are not certain it was a crime. MARK OR ASK – 41b. Did any incidents of this type happen to you? 41c. How many times? 42a. People often don’t think of incidents committed by someone they know. (Other than any incidents already mentioned,) did you have something stolen from you OR were you attacked or threatened by (Exclude telephone threats) – (a) Someone at work or school – (b) A neighbor or friend – (c) A relative or family member – (d) Any other person you’ve met or known? MARK OR ASK – 42b. Did any incidents of this type happen to you? 42c. How many times? 43a. Incidents involving forced or unwanted sexual acts are often difficult to talk about. (Other than any incidents already mentioned,) have you been forced or coerced to engage in unwanted sexual activity by – (a) Someone you didn’t know before – (b) A casual acquaintance – OR (c) Someone you know well? MARK OR ASK – 43b. Did any incidents of this type happen to you? 43c. How many times? Briefly describe incident(s) 541 1 2 542 Briefly describe incident(s) 543 1 2 544 Briefly describe incident(s) 545 1 2 546 Yes – What happened? Describe above No – SKIP to 42a Number of times (41c) Yes – What happened? Describe above No – SKIP to 43a Number of times (42c) Yes – What happened? Describe above No – SKIP to 44a Number of times (43c) FORM NCVS-1 (4-24-2000) Page 5 HOUSEHOLD RESPONDENT’S SCREEN QUESTIONS Briefly describe incident(s)44a. During the last 6 months, (other than any incidents already mentioned,) did you call the police to report something that happened to YOU which you thought was a crime? 1 Yes – What happened?547 No – SKIP to 45a2 Describe above 548 OFFICE USE ONLY * CHECK ITEM B Look at 44a. If unsure, ASK, otherwise, mark without asking. Were you (was the respondent) attacked 549 1 Yes – Ask 44b or threatened, or was something stolen or an 2 No – SKIP to 45aattempt made to steal something that belonged to you (the respondent) or another household member? 44b. How many times? 550 Number of times (44b) Briefly describe incident(s)45a. During the last 6 months, (other than any incidents already mentioned,) did anything which you thought was a crime happen to YOU, but you did NOT report to the police? 551 1 Yes – What happened? Describe above 2 No – SKIP to Check Item D 552 OFFICE USE ONLY * CHECK ITEM C Look at 45a. If unsure, ASK, otherwise, mark without asking. Were you (was the respondent) attacked 553 1 Yes – Ask 45b or threatened, or was something stolen or an 2 No – SKIP to Check Item Dattempt made to steal something that belonged to you (the respondent) or another household member? 45b. How many times? 554 Number of times (45b) CHECK ITEM D Who besides the respondent was present when the 555 1 Telephone interview – SKIP to 46ascreen questions were asked? (If telephone interview, mark box 1 only.) Personal interview – Mark all that apply.* 2 No one besides respondent present 3 Respondent’s spouse 4 HHLD member(s) 12+, not spouse 5 HHLD member(s) under 12 6 Nonhousehold member(s) 7 Someone was present – Can’t say who CHECK ITEM E 8 Don’t know if someone else present If self-response interview, SKIP to 46a. 556 1 Yes Did the person for whom this interview was taken 2 Nohelp the proxy respondent answer any screen 3 Person for whom interview taken not presentquestions? FORM NCVS-1 (4-24-2000)Page 6 HOUSEHOLD RESPONDENT’S VANDALISM SCREEN QUESTIONS 46a. Now I’d like to ask about ALL acts of vandalism that may have been committed during the last 6 months against YOUR household. Vandalism is the deliberate, intentional damage to or destruction of household property. Examples are breaking windows, slashing tires, and painting graffiti on walls. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Motor vehicle (including parts) Bicycle (including parts) Mailbox House window/screen/door Yard or garden (trees, shrubs, fence, etc.) Furniture, other household goods Clothing Animal (pet, livestock, etc.) 55846b. What kind of property was damaged or destroyed in this/these act(s) of vandalism? Anything else? Since __________ ______, 20 ____, has anyone intentionally damaged or destroyed property owned by you or someone else in your household? 1 2 Yes557 1 Broken glass: window, windshield, glass in door, mirror 55946c. What kind of damage was done in this/these act(s) of vandalism? Anything else? 2 3 4 5 6 Defaced: marred, graffiti, dirtied Burned: use of fire, heat or explosives Drove into or ran over with vehicle Other breaking or tearing Injured or killed animals 8 9 Other – Specify 7 Other – Specify * * 46d. What was the total dollar amount of the damage caused by this/these act(s) of vandalism during the last 6 months? (Use repair costs if the property was repaired.) 46f. How many times? 560 $ . – SKIP to Check Item F1 X 0 Don’t know No cost – SKIP to Check Item F1 46e. Was the damage under $100 or $100 or more? 1 2 3 Under $100 $100 or more Don’t know 561 Look at 46a. If unsure, ASK, otherwise, mark without asking. In the vandalism just mentioned, were you (was the respondent) attacked or threatened, or was something stolen or an attempt made to steal something that belonged to you (the respondent) or another household member? (other than any incident(s) already mentioned) Briefly describe incident(s) 00 Mark (X) all property that was damaged or destroyed by vandalism during reference period. Continue asking "Anything else?" until you get a "No" response. Mark (X) all kinds of damage by vandals that occurred during reference period. Continue asking "Anything else?" until you get a "No" response. (INCLUDE total amount for all incidents of vandalism during the last 6 months.) (EXCLUDE any damage done in conjunction with incidents already mentioned.) (EXCLUDE any damage done in incidents already mentioned.) No – SKIP to Check Item G CHECK ITEM F1 562 1 2 563 Yes – What happened? Describe above No – SKIP to 46g Number of times (46f) FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – Go to 46g before completing Check Item G. NOTES FORM NCVS-1 (4-24-2000) Page 7 HOUSEHOLD RESPONDENT’S HATE CRIME SCREEN QUESTIONS 46g. Hate crimes or crimes of prejudice or bigotry occur when (an offender/offenders) target(s) people because of one or more of their characteristics or religious beliefs. Do you have any reason to suspect the vandalism just discussed was a hate crime or crime of prejudice or bigotry? 586 1 Yes – Ask 46h 2 No SKIP to Check Item G3 Don’t know 46h. An offender/Offenders can target people for a variety of ..... reasons, but we are only going to ask you about a few today. Do you suspect the offender(s) targeted you because of... (a) Your race? 564 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know (b) Your religion? 565 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know (c) Your ethnic background or national origin (for example, people of Hispanic origin)? 566 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know (d) Your disability(ies) (by this I mean physical, mental, or developmental disabilities)? 567 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know (e) Your gender? 568 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know (f) Your sexual orientation? 569 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know If "Yes," SAY – (by this we mean homosexual, bisexual, or heterosexual) 46i. Some offenders target people because they associate with certain people or the (offender perceives/ offenders perceive) them as having certain characteristics or religious beliefs. Do you suspect you were targeted because of... (a) Your association with people who have certain characteristics or religious beliefs (for example, a multiracial couple)? 587 1 Yes –Specify 2 No 3 Don’t know 588 (b) The offender(s)’s perception of your characteristics or religious beliefs (for example, the offender(s) thought you were Jewish because you went into a synagogue)? 589 1 Yes –Specify 2 No 3 Don’t know 590 CHECK ITEM F2 Are one or more boxes marked "Yes" in 46h Yes – Ask 46j OR 46i? No – SKIP to Check Item G 46j. Do you have any evidence that this vandalism was a hate crime or crime of prejudice or bigotry? 591 1 Yes – Ask 46k 2 No If "No" or "Don’t know," ASK – SKIP to Check Item G3 Don’t know Did the offender(s) say something, write anything, or leave anything behind at the crime scene that would suggest you were targeted because of your characteristics or religious beliefs? FORM NCVS-1 (4-24-2000)Page 8 CHECK ITEM G Transcribe "number of times" entry for each of the following: ____________ Number of times (36c)(a) (h) (i) No entries transcribed below – Go to Check Item H ____________ Number of times (37c) ____________ Number of times (39c) ____________ Number of times (40c) ____________ Number of times (41c) ____________ Number of times (42c) ____________ Number of times (43c) ____________ Number of times (44b) ____________ Number of times (45b) ____________ Number of times (46f) (f) (g) (j) (b) (c) (d) (e) Screen Question, Item 36c, page 3 Screen Question, Item 39c, page 4 Screen Question, Item 40c, page 4 Screen Question, Item 41c, page 5 Screen Question, Item 42c, page 5 Screen Question, Item 43c, page 5 Screen Question, Item 44b, page 6 Screen Question, Item 45b, page 6 Screen Question, Item 37c, page 3 Vandalism Screen Question, Item 46f, page 7 HOUSEHOLD RESPONDENT’S CHECK ITEM G FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – After completing Check Item G, fill a separate crime incident report for each screen question that has an entry of 1 or more. HOUSEHOLD RESPONDENT’S HATE CRIME SCREEN QUESTIONS 46k. The next questions ask about the evidence you have that makes you suspect this vandalism was a hate crime or a crime of prejudice or bigotry. As I read the following questions, please tell me if any of the following happened: (a) Did the offender(s) make fun of you, make negative comments, use slang, hurtful words, or abusive language? (b) Were any hate symbols present at the crime scene to indicate the offender(s) targeted you for a particular reason (for example, a swastika, graffiti on the walls of a temple, a burning cross, or written words)? (c) Did a police investigation confirm the offender(s) targeted you (for example, did the offender(s) confess a motive, or did the police find books, journals, or pictures that indicated the offender(s) (was/were) prejudiced against people with certain characteristics or religious beliefs)? (d) Do you know the offender(s) (has/have) committed similar hate crimes or crimes of prejudice or bigotry in the past? (e) Did the vandalism occur on or near a holiday, event, location, gathering place, or building commonly associated with a specific group (for example, at the Gay Pride March or at a synagogue, Korean church, or gay bar)? (f) Have other hate crimes or crimes of prejudice or bigotry happened to you or in your area/ neighborhood where people have been targeted? (g) Do your feelings, instincts, or perception lead you to suspect this vandalism was a hate crime or crime of prejudice or bigotry, but you do not have enough evidence to know for sure? Yes1 2 No 3 Don’t know592 Yes1 2 No 3 Don’t know593 Yes1 2 No 3 Don’t know594 Yes1 2 No 3 Don’t know595 Yes1 2 No 3 Don’t know596 Yes1 2 No 3 Don’t know597 Yes1 2 No 3 Don’t know598 CHECK ITEM G Transcribe "number of times" entry for each of the following: ____________ Number of times (36c)(a) (h) (i) No entries transcribed below – Go to Check Item H ____________ Number of times (37c) ____________ Number of times (39c) ____________ Number of times (40c) ____________ Number of times (41c) ____________ Number of times (42c) ____________ Number of times (43c) ____________ Number of times (44b) ____________ Number of times (45b) ____________ Number of times (46f) (f) (g) (j) (b) (c) (d) (e) Screen Question, Item 36c, page 3 Screen Question, Item 39c, page 4 Screen Question, Item 40c, page 4 Screen Question, Item 41c, page 5 Screen Question, Item 42c, page 5 Screen Question, Item 43c, page 5 Screen Question, Item 44b, page 6 Screen Question, Item 45b, page 6 Screen Question, Item 37c, page 3 Vandalism Screen Question, Item 46f, page 7 HOUSEHOLD RESPONDENT’S CHECK ITEM G FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – After completing Check Item G, fill a separate crime incident report for each screen question that has an entry of 1 or more. HOUSEHOLD RESPONDENT’S HATE CRIME SCREEN QUESTIONS 46k. The next questions ask about the evidence you have that makes you suspect this vandalism was a hate crime or a crime of prejudice or bigotry. As I read the following questions, please tell me if any of the following happened: (a) Did the offender(s) make fun of you, make negative comments, use slang, hurtful words, or abusive language? (b) Were any hate symbols present at the crime scene to indicate the offender(s) targeted you for a particular reason (for example, a swastika, graffiti on the walls of a temple, a burning cross, or written words)? (c) Did a police investigation confirm the offender(s) targeted you (for example, did the offender(s) confess a motive, or did the police find books, journals, or pictures that indicated the offender(s) (was/were) prejudiced against people with certain characteristics or religious beliefs)? (d) Do you know the offender(s) (has/have) committed similar hate crimes or crimes of prejudice or bigotry in the past? (e) Did the vandalism occur on or near a holiday, event, location, gathering place, or building commonly associated with a specific group (for example, at the Gay Pride March or at a synagogue, Korean church, or gay bar)? (f) Have other hate crimes or crimes of prejudice or bigotry happened to you or in your area/ neighborhood where people have been targeted? (g) Do your feelings, instincts, or perception lead you to suspect this vandalism was a hate crime or crime of prejudice or bigotry, but you do not have enough evidence to know for sure? Yes1 2 No 3 Don’t know592 Yes1 2 No 3 Don’t know593 Yes1 2 No 3 Don’t know594 Yes1 2 No 3 Don’t know595 Yes1 2 No 3 Don’t know596 Yes1 2 No 3 Don’t know597 Yes1 2 No 3 Don’t know598 FORM NCVS-1 (4-24-2000) Page 9 HOUSEHOLD RESPONDENT’S EMPLOYMENT QUESTIONS CHECK ITEM H Is the respondent 16 years or older? 47a. 47b. 47c. Did you have a job or work at a business LAST WEEK? (Do not include volunteer work or work around the house.) (If farm or business operator in household, ask about unpaid work.) ASK OR VERIFY – Did you have a job or work at a business DURING THE LAST 6 MONTHS? Did that (job/work) last 2 consecutive weeks or more? ASK OR VERIFY – 48a. Which of the following best describes your job? PERSONAL INTERVIEW (Show flashcard) TELEPHONE INTERVIEW – Were you employed in the (Read main headings until you get a yes. Then read answer categories) – Mark (X) only one category. ASK OR VERIFY – 48b. Is your job with (Read answer categories) – If box 12 is marked in 48a, mark without asking. 48c. Are you employed by a college or university? 48d. While working at your job, do you work mostly in (Read answer categories) – CHECK ITEM I Is this the last household member to be interviewed? 1 Yes – Ask 47a 2 No – SKIP to Check Item I 576 1 Yes – SKIP to 48a 2 No – Ask 47b 577 1 Yes – Ask 47c 2 No – SKIP to Check Item I 578 1 Yes – Ask 48a 2 No – SKIP to Check Item I Medical Profession – As a – 1 Physician579 2 Nurse 3 Technician 4 Other – Specify Mental Health Services Field – Are your duties – 5 Professional (Social worker/psychiatrist) 6 Custodial care 7 Other – Specify Teaching Profession – Were you employed in a – 8 Preschool 9 Elementary 10 Junior high or middle school 11 High school 12 College or university 13 Technical or industrial school 14 Special education facility 15 Other – Specify Law Enforcement or Security Field – Were you employed as a – 16 Law enforcement officer 17 Prison or jail guard 18 Security guard 19 Other – Specify Retail Sales – Were you employed as a – 20 Convenience or liquor store clerk 21 Gas station attendant 22 Bartender 23 Other – Specify Transportation Field – Were you employed as a – 24 Bus driver 25 Taxi cab driver 26 Other – Specify OR 27 Something else – Specify 580 1 A private company, business, or individual for wages? 2 The Federal government? 3 A State, county, or local government? 4 Yourself (Self-employed) in your own business, professional practice, or farm? 581 1 Yes 2 No 582 1 A city? 2 Suburban area? 3 Rural area? 4 Combination of any of these? Yes – Ask or verify Control Card items. Then END interview. No – Ask or verify Control Card items. See note below before interviewing next household member. FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – If the next household member to be interviewed is under 18, tell the household respondent that you will be asking the same questions you just asked him/her. FORM NCVS-1 (4-24-2000)Page 10 INDIVIDUAL’S PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS Noninterview (Type Z) – Fill 19–28 on this page and 14 on cover page 5 17. NAME Last First Type of interview Line No. 401 1 2 3 4 Per. – Self-respondent Tel. – Self-respondent Per. – Proxy Tel. – Proxy 18. 19. Fill 13 on cover page ________ Line No. ...402 AFTER INTERVIEW – TRANSCRIBE FROM CONTROL CARD 20. Relationship to reference person 21. Age last birthday 22a. Marital status THIS survey period 22b. Marital status LAST survey period 23. Sex 24. Armed Forces member 25a. Education -highest grade 25b. Education -complete that year? 27. Race 28. Hispanic origin 403 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 Husband Wife Son Daughter Father Mother Brother Sister Other relative Nonrelative Ref. person ________ Age 405 1 2 3 4 5 Married Widowed Divorced Separated Never married 406 1 2 3 4 5 Married Widowed Divorced Separated Never married Not interviewed last survey period 6 407 1 2 M F 408 1 2 Yes No 410 1 2 Yes No 413 1 2 Yes No 404 _________ Grade 409 412 1 2 3 White Black Amer. Indian, Aleut, Eskimo Asian, Pacific Islander Other 4 5 26. Attending school 411 1 College/ University Trade school Vocational school 4 None of the above schools 2 3 (cc 13b) (cc 17) (cc 18) (From previous enumeration) (cc 19) (cc 20) (cc 21a) (cc 21b) (cc 22) (cc 23) (cc 24) Regular school 0 29. 33a. Date of interview 501If unsure, ASK OR VERIFY – How long have you lived at this address? (Enter number of months OR years.) ____________ Months (1-11) – SKIP to 33b505 OR ____________ Years (Round to nearest whole year) – Fill Check Item A 506 5 years or more – SKIP to 36a Less than 5 years – Ask 33b CHECK ITEM A How many years are entered in 33a? 33b. Altogether, how many times have you moved in the last 5 years, that is, since _________________, 19 ___? ____________ Number of times508 Month Day Year MOBILITY QUESTIONS Before we get to the crime questions, I have one or two questions that are helpful in studying where and why crimes occur. INDIVIDUAL’S PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS Noninterview (Type Z) – Fill 19–28 on this page and 14 on cover page 5 17. NAME Last First Type of interview Line No. 401 1 2 3 4 Per. – Self-respondent Tel. – Self-respondent Per. – Proxy Tel. – Proxy 18. 19. Fill 13 on cover page ________ Line No. ...402 AFTER INTERVIEW – TRANSCRIBE FROM CONTROL CARD 20. Relationship to reference person 21. Age last birthday 22a. Marital status THIS survey period 22b. Marital status LAST survey period 23. Sex 24. Armed Forces member 25a. Education -highest grade 25b. Education -complete that year? 27. Race 28. Hispanic origin 403 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 Husband Wife Son Daughter Father Mother Brother Sister Other relative Nonrelative Ref. person ________ Age 405 1 2 3 4 5 Married Widowed Divorced Separated Never married 406 1 2 3 4 5 Married Widowed Divorced Separated Never married Not interviewed last survey period 6 407 1 2 M F 408 1 2 Yes No 410 1 2 Yes No 413 1 2 Yes No 404 _________ Grade 409 412 1 2 3 White Black Amer. Indian, Aleut, Eskimo Asian, Pacific Islander Other 4 5 26. Attending school 411 1 College/ University Trade school Vocational school 4 None of the above schools 2 3 (cc 13b) (cc 17) (cc 18) (From previous enumeration) (cc 19) (cc 20) (cc 21a) (cc 21b) (cc 22) (cc 23) (cc 24) Regular school 0 29. 33a. Date of interview 501If unsure, ASK OR VERIFY – How long have you lived at this address? (Enter number of months OR years.) ____________ Months (1-11) – SKIP to 33b505 OR ____________ Years (Round to nearest whole year) – Fill Check Item A 506 5 years or more – SKIP to 36a Less than 5 years – Ask 33b CHECK ITEM A How many years are entered in 33a? 33b. Altogether, how many times have you moved in the last 5 years, that is, since _________________, 19 ___? ____________ Number of times508 Month Day Year MOBILITY QUESTIONS Before we get to the crime questions, I have one or two questions that are helpful in studying where and why crimes occur. FORM NCVS-1 (4-24-2000) Page 11 INDIVIDUAL’S SCREEN QUESTIONS 36a. I’m going to read some examples that will give you an idea of the kinds of crimes this study covers. As I go through them, tell me if any of these happened to you in the last 6 months, that is since __________ ______, 20 ____. Was something belonging to YOU stolen, such as – (a) Things that you carry, like luggage, a wallet, purse, briefcase, book – (b) Clothing, jewelry, or calculator – (c) Bicycle or sports equipment – (d) Things in your home – like a TV, stereo, or tools – (e) Things from a vehicle, such as a package, groceries, camera, or cassette tapes – OR (f) Did anyone ATTEMPT to steal anything belonging to you? 40a. (Other than any incidents already mentioned,) since __________ ______, 20 ____, were you attacked or threatened OR did you have something stolen from you – (a) At home including the porch or yard – (b) At or near a friend’s, relative’s, or neighbor’s home – (c) At work or school – (d) In places such as a storage shed or laundry room, a shopping mall, restaurant, bank, or airport – (e) While riding in any vehicle – (f) On the street or in a parking lot – (g) At such places as a party, theater, gym, picnic area, bowling lanes, or while fishing or hunting – OR (h) Did anyone ATTEMPT to attack or ATTEMPT to steal anything belonging to you from any of these places? Briefly describe incident(s) Briefly describe incident(s) 36b. Did any incidents of this type happen to you? MARK OR ASK – 36c. How many times? 1 Yes – What happened?532 Number of times (36c) 533 No – SKIP to 40a2 Describe above 40b. Did any incidents of this type happen to you? MARK OR ASK – 40c. How many times? 1 Yes – What happened?539 Number of times (40c) 540 No – SKIP to 41a2 Describe above FORM NCVS-1 (4-24-2000)Page 12 INDIVIDUAL’S SCREEN QUESTIONS 41a. (Other than any incidents already mentioned,) has anyone attacked or threatened you in any of these ways (Exclude telephone threats) – (a) With any weapon, for instance, a gun or knife – (b) With anything like a baseball bat, frying pan, scissors, or stick – (c) By something thrown, such as a rock or bottle – (d) Include any grabbing, punching, or choking, (e) Any rape, attempted rape or other type of sexual attack – (f) Any face to face threats – OR (g) Any attack or threat or use of force by anyone at all? Please mention it even if you are not certain it was a crime. MARK OR ASK – 41b. Did any incidents of this type happen to you? 41c. How many times? 42a. People often don’t think of incidents committed by someone they know. (Other than any incidents already mentioned,) did you have something stolen from you OR were you attacked or threatened by (Exclude telephone threats) – (a) Someone at work or school – (b) A neighbor or friend – (c) A relative or family member – (d) Any other person you’ve met or known? MARK OR ASK – 42b. Did any incidents of this type happen to you? 42c. How many times? 43a. Incidents involving forced or unwanted sexual acts are often difficult to talk about. (Other than any incidents already mentioned,) have you been forced or coerced to engage in unwanted sexual activity by – (a) Someone you didn’t know before – (b) A casual acquaintance – OR (c) Someone you know well? MARK OR ASK – 43b. Did any incidents of this type happen to you? 43c. How many times? Briefly describe incident(s) 541 1 2 542 Briefly describe incident(s) 543 1 2 544 Briefly describe incident(s) 545 1 2 546 Yes – What happened? Describe above No – SKIP to 42a Number of times (41c) Yes – What happened? Describe above No – SKIP to 43a Number of times (42c) Yes – What happened? Describe above No – SKIP to 44a Number of times (43c) FORM NCVS-1 (4-24-2000) Page 13 INDIVIDUAL’S SCREEN QUESTIONS 44a. During the last 6 months, (other than any incidents already mentioned,) did you call the police to report something that happened to YOU which you thought was a crime? CHECK ITEM B Look at 44a. If unsure, ASK, otherwise, mark without asking. Were you (was the respondent) attacked or threatened, or was something stolen or an attempt made to steal something that belonged to you (the respondent) or another household member? 44b. How many times? 45a. During the last 6 months, (other than any incidents already mentioned,) did anything which you thought was a crime happen to YOU, but you did NOT report to the police? CHECK ITEM C Look at 45a. If unsure, ASK, otherwise, mark without asking. Were you (was the respondent) attacked or threatened, or was something stolen or an attempt made to steal something that belonged to you (the respondent) or another household member? 45b. How many times? CHECK Who besides the respondent was present whenITEM D the screen questions were asked? (If telephone interview, mark box 1 only.) CHECK ITEM E CHECK ITEM G If self-response interview, SKIP to Check Item G. Did the person for whom this interview was taken help the proxy respondent answer any screen questions? Transcribe "number of times" entry for each of the following: (a) Screen Question, Item 36c, page 12 (b) Screen Question, Item 40c, page 12 (c) Screen Question, Item 41c, page 13 (d) Screen Question, Item 42c, page 13 (e) Screen Question, Item 43c, page 13 (f) Screen Question, Item 44b, page 14 (g) Screen Question, Item 45b, page 14 Briefly describe incident(s) 547 1 2 Yes – What happened? Describe above No – SKIP to 45a 548 * OFFICE USE ONLY 549 1 2 Yes – Ask 44b No – SKIP to 45a 550 Number of times (44b) Briefly describe incident(s) 551 1 2 Yes – What happened? Describe above No – SKIP to Check Item D 552 * OFFICE USE ONLY 553 1 2 Yes – Ask 45b No – SKIP to Check Item D 554 Number of times (45b) 555 1 Telephone interview – SKIP to Check Item G * Personal interview – Mark all that apply. 2 No one besides respondent present 3 Respondent’s spouse 4 HHLD member(s) 12+, not spouse 5 HHLD member(s) under 12 6 Nonhousehold member(s) 7 Someone was present – Can’t say who 8 Don’t know if someone else present 556 1 Yes 2 No 3 Person for whom interview taken not present No entries transcribed below – Go to Check Item H ____________ Number of times (36c) ____________ Number of times (40c) ____________ Number of times (41c) ____________ Number of times (42c) ____________ Number of times (43c) ____________ Number of times (44b) ____________ Number of times (45b) FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – After completing Check Item G, fill a separate crime incident report for each screen question that has an entry of 1 or more. Do this before marking Check Item H. FORM NCVS-1 (4-24-2000)Page 14 INDIVIDUAL’S EMPLOYMENT QUESTIONS Be sure to fill any incident reports before marking Check Item H. CHECK ITEM H Is the respondent 16 years or older? 47a. 47b. 47c. Did you have a job or work at a business LAST WEEK? (Do not include volunteer work or work around the house.) (If farm or business operator in household, ask about unpaid work.) ASK OR VERIFY – Did you have a job or work at a business DURING THE LAST 6 MONTHS? Did that (job/work) last 2 consecutive weeks or more? ASK OR VERIFY – 48a. Which of the following best describes your job? PERSONAL INTERVIEW (Show flashcard) TELEPHONE INTERVIEW – Were you employed in the (Read main headings until you get a yes. Then read answer categories) – Mark (X) only one category. ASK OR VERIFY – 48b. Is your job with (Read answer categories) – If box 12 is marked in 48a, mark without asking.48c. Are you employed by a college or university? 48d. While working at your job, do you work mostly in (Read answer categories) – CHECK ITEM I Is this the last household member to be interviewed? 1 Yes – Ask 47a 2 No – SKIP to Check Item I 576 1 Yes – SKIP to 48a 2 No – Ask 47b 577 1 Yes – Ask 47c 2 No – SKIP to Check Item I 578 1 Yes – Ask 48a 2 No – SKIP to Check Item I Medical Profession – As a – 1 Physician579 2 Nurse 3 Technician 4 Other – Specify Mental Health Services Field – Are your duties – 5 Professional (Social worker/psychiatrist) 6 Custodial care 7 Other – Specify Teaching Profession – Were you employed in a – 8 Preschool 9 Elementary 10 Junior high or middle school 11 High school 12 College or university 13 Technical or industrial school 14 Special education facility 15 Other – Specify Law Enforcement or Security Field – Were you employed as a – 16 Law enforcement officer 17 Prison or jail guard 18 Security guard 19 Other – Specify Retail Sales – Were you employed as a – 20 Convenience or liquor store clerk 21 Gas station attendant 22 Bartender 23 Other – Specify Transportation Field – Were you employed as a – 24 Bus driver 25 Taxi cab driver 26 Other – Specify OR 27 Something else – Specify 580 1 2 3 4 A private company, business, or individual for wages? The Federal government? A State, county, or local government? Yourself (Self-employed) in your own business, professional practice, or farm? 581 1 2 Yes No 582 1 2 3 4 A city? Suburban area? Rural area? Combination of any of these? Yes – END interview. No – See note below before interviewing next household member. FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – If the current respondent is a parent or legal guardian and the next household member to be interviewed is under 18, tell the current respondent that you will be asking the same questions you just asked him/her. FORM NCVS-1 (4-24-2000) Page 15 3 Per. – Proxy 4 Tel. – Proxy ...Fill 13 on cover page INDIVIDUAL’S PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS 17. NAME Last First Type of interview Line No. 401 1 2 Per. – Self-respondent Tel. – Self-respondent 18. 19. 402 AFTER INTERVIEW – TRANSCRIBE FROM CONTROL CARD 20. Relationship to reference person 21. Age last birthday 22a. Marital status THIS survey period 22b. Marital status LAST survey period 23. Sex 24. Armed Forces member 25a. Education -highest grade 25b. Education -complete that year? 27. Race 28. Hispanic origin 403 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 Husband Wife Son Daughter Father Mother Brother Sister Other relative Nonrelative Ref. person ________ Age 405 1 2 3 4 5 Married Widowed Divorced Separated Never married 406 1 2 3 4 5 Married Widowed Divorced Separated Never married Not interviewed last survey period 6 407 1 2 M F 408 1 2 Yes No 410 1 2 Yes No 413 1 2 Yes No 404 _________ Grade 409 412 1 2 3 White Black Amer. Indian, Aleut, Eskimo Asian, Pacific Islander Other 4 5 26. Attending school 411 1 College/ University Trade school Vocational school 4 None of the above schools 2 3 (cc 13b) (cc 17) (cc 18) (From previous enumeration) (cc 19) (cc 20) (cc 21a) (cc 21b) (cc 22) (cc 23) (cc 24) Regular school 0 29. 33a. Date of interview 501If unsure, ASK OR VERIFY – How long have you lived at this address? (Enter number of months OR years.) ____________ Months (1-11) – SKIP to 33b505 OR ____________ Years (Round to nearest whole year) – Fill Check Item A 506 5 years or more – SKIP to 36a Less than 5 years – Ask 33b CHECK ITEM A How many years are entered in 33a? 33b. Altogether, how many times have you moved in the last 5 years, that is, since _________________, 19 ___? ____________ Number of times508 Month Day Year MOBILITY QUESTIONS Before we get to the crime questions, I have one or two questions that are helpful in studying where and why crimes occur. Line No. 5 Noninterview (Type Z) – Fill 19–28 on this page and 14 on cover page FORM NCVS-1 (4-24-2000)Page 16 INDIVIDUAL’S SCREEN QUESTIONS 36a. I’m going to read some examples that will give you an idea of the kinds of crimes this study covers. Was something belonging to YOU stolen, such as – (a) Things that you carry, like luggage, a wallet, purse, briefcase, book – As I go through them, tell me if any of these happened to you in the last 6 months, that is since __________ ______, 20 ____. (b) Clothing, jewelry, or calculator – (c) Bicycle or sports equipment – (d) Things in your home – like a TV, stereo, or tools – (e) Things from a vehicle, such as a package, groceries, camera, or cassette tapes – (f) Did anyone ATTEMPT to steal anything belonging to you? OR 36b. Did any incidents of this type happen to you? MARK OR ASK – 36c. How many times? 40a. (a) At home including the porch or yard – OR 40b. Did any incidents of this type happen to you? MARK OR ASK – 40c. How many times? Briefly describe incident(s) 1 Yes – What happened?532 Number of times (36c) 533 No – SKIP to 40a2 Describe above 1 Yes – What happened?539 Number of times (40c) 540 No – SKIP to 41a2 Describe above (Other than any incidents already mentioned,) since __________ ______, 20 ____, were you attacked or threatened OR did you have something stolen from you – (b) At or near a friend’s, relative’s, or neighbor’s home – (c) At work or school – (d) In places such as a storage shed or laundry room, a shopping mall, restaurant, bank, or airport – (e) While riding in any vehicle – (f) On the street or in a parking lot – (g) At such places as a party, theater, gym, picnic area, bowling lanes, or while fishing or hunting – (h) Did anyone ATTEMPT to attack or ATTEMPT to steal anything belonging to you from any of these places? Briefly describe incident(s) INDIVIDUAL’S SCREEN QUESTIONS 36a. I’m going to read some examples that will give you an idea of the kinds of crimes this study covers. Was something belonging to YOU stolen, such as – (a) Things that you carry, like luggage, a wallet, purse, briefcase, book – As I go through them, tell me if any of these happened to you in the last 6 months, that is since __________ ______, 20 ____. (b) Clothing, jewelry, or calculator – (c) Bicycle or sports equipment – (d) Things in your home – like a TV, stereo, or tools – (e) Things from a vehicle, such as a package, groceries, camera, or cassette tapes – (f) Did anyone ATTEMPT to steal anything belonging to you? OR 36b. Did any incidents of this type happen to you? MARK OR ASK – 36c. How many times? 40a. (a) At home including the porch or yard – OR 40b. Did any incidents of this type happen to you? MARK OR ASK – 40c. How many times? Briefly describe incident(s) 1 Yes – What happened?532 Number of times (36c) 533 No – SKIP to 40a2 Describe above 1 Yes – What happened?539 Number of times (40c) 540 No – SKIP to 41a2 Describe above (Other than any incidents already mentioned,) since __________ ______, 20 ____, were you attacked or threatened OR did you have something stolen from you – (b) At or near a friend’s, relative’s, or neighbor’s home – (c) At work or school – (d) In places such as a storage shed or laundry room, a shopping mall, restaurant, bank, or airport – (e) While riding in any vehicle – (f) On the street or in a parking lot – (g) At such places as a party, theater, gym, picnic area, bowling lanes, or while fishing or hunting – (h) Did anyone ATTEMPT to attack or ATTEMPT to steal anything belonging to you from any of these places? Briefly describe incident(s) FORM NCVS-1 (4-24-2000) Page 17 INDIVIDUAL’S SCREEN QUESTIONS 41a. (Other than any incidents already mentioned,) has anyone attacked or threatened you in any of these ways (Exclude telephone threats) – (a) With any weapon, for instance, a gun or knife – (b) With anything like a baseball bat, frying pan, scissors, or stick – (c) By something thrown, such as a rock or bottle – (d) Include any grabbing, punching, or choking, (e) Any rape, attempted rape or other type of sexual attack – (f) Any face to face threats – OR (g) Any attack or threat or use of force by anyone at all? Please mention it even if you are not certain it was a crime. MARK OR ASK – 41b. Did any incidents of this type happen to you? 41c. How many times? 42a. People often don’t think of incidents committed by someone they know. (Other than any incidents already mentioned,) did you have something stolen from you OR were you attacked or threatened by (Exclude telephone threats) – (a) Someone at work or school – (b) A neighbor or friend – (c) A relative or family member – (d) Any other person you’ve met or known? MARK OR ASK – 42b. Did any incidents of this type happen to you? 42c. How many times? 43a. Incidents involving forced or unwanted sexual acts are often difficult to talk about. (Other than any incidents already mentioned,) have you been forced or coerced to engage in unwanted sexual activity by – (a) Someone you didn’t know before – (b) A casual acquaintance – OR (c) Someone you know well? MARK OR ASK – 43b. Did any incidents of this type happen to you? 43c. How many times? Briefly describe incident(s) 541 1 2 542 Briefly describe incident(s) 543 1 2 544 Briefly describe incident(s) 545 1 2 546 Yes – What happened? Describe above No – SKIP to 42a Number of times (41c) Yes – What happened? Describe above No – SKIP to 43a Number of times (42c) Yes – What happened? Describe above No – SKIP to 44a Number of times (43c) FORM NCVS-1 (4-24-2000)Page 18 INDIVIDUAL’S SCREEN QUESTIONS 44a. During the last 6 months, (other than any incidents already mentioned,) did you call the police to report something that happened to YOU which you thought was a crime? CHECK ITEM B Look at 44a. If unsure, ASK, otherwise, mark without asking. Were you (was the respondent) attacked or threatened, or was something stolen or an attempt made to steal something that belonged to you (the respondent) or another household member? 44b. How many times? 45a. During the last 6 months, (other than any incidents already mentioned,) did anything which you thought was a crime happen to YOU, but you did NOT report to the police? CHECK ITEM C Look at 45a. If unsure, ASK, otherwise, mark without asking. Were you (was the respondent) attacked or threatened, or was something stolen or an attempt made to steal something that belonged to you (the respondent) or another household member? 45b. How many times? CHECK Who besides the respondent was present when theITEM D screen questions were asked? (If telephone interview, mark box 1 only.) CHECK ITEM E CHECK ITEM G If self-response interview, SKIP to Check Item G. Did the person for whom this interview was taken help the proxy respondent answer any screen questions? Transcribe "number of times" entry for each of the following: (a) Screen Question, Item 36c, page 17 (b) Screen Question, Item 40c, page 17 (c) Screen Question, Item 41c, page 18 (d) Screen Question, Item 42c, page 18 (e) Screen Question, Item 43c, page 18 (f) Screen Question, Item 44b, page 19 (g) Screen Question, Item 45b, page 19 Briefly describe incident(s) 547 1 2 Yes – What happened? Describe above No – SKIP to 45a 548 * OFFICE USE ONLY 549 1 2 Yes – Ask 44b No – SKIP to 45a 550 Number of times (44b) Briefly describe incident(s) 551 1 2 Yes – What happened? Describe above No – SKIP to Check Item D 552 * OFFICE USE ONLY 553 1 2 Yes – Ask 45b No – SKIP to Check Item D 554 Number of times (45b) 555 1 Telephone interview – SKIP to Check Item G * Personal interview – Mark all that apply. 2 No one besides respondent present 3 Respondent’s spouse 4 HHLD member(s) 12+, not spouse 5 HHLD member(s) under 12 6 Nonhousehold member(s) 7 Someone was present – Can’t say who 8 Don’t know if someone else present 556 1 Yes 2 No 3 Person for whom interview taken not present No entries transcribed below – Go to Check Item H ____________ Number of times (36c) ____________ Number of times (40c) ____________ Number of times (41c) ____________ Number of times (42c) ____________ Number of times (43c) ____________ Number of times (44b) ____________ Number of times (45b) FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – After completing Check Item G, fill a separate crime incident report for each screen question that has an entry of 1 or more. Do this before marking Check Item H. FORM NCVS-1 (4-24-2000) Page 19 INDIVIDUAL’S EMPLOYMENT QUESTIONS Be sure to fill any incident reports before marking Check Item H. CHECK Is the respondent 16 years or older? 1 Yes – Ask 47aITEM H 2 No – SKIP to Check Item I 47a. Did you have a job or work at a business LAST WEEK? (Do not include volunteer work or work around the house.) 576 1 Yes – SKIP to 48a(If farm or business operator in household, ask about 2 No – Ask 47bunpaid work.) ASK OR VERIFY – 577 1 Yes – Ask 47c47b. Did you have a job or work at a business DURING THE 2 No – SKIP to Check Item ILAST 6 MONTHS? 47c. Did that (job/work) last 2 consecutive weeks 578 1 Yes – Ask 48aor more? 2 No – SKIP to Check Item I ASK OR VERIFY – Medical Profession – As a – 48a. Which of the following best describes your job? 1 Physician579PERSONAL INTERVIEW (Show flashcard) 2 Nurse TELEPHONE INTERVIEW – Were you employed in 3 Technician the (Read main headings until you get a yes. 4 Other – Specify Then read answer categories) – Mental Health Services Field – Are your duties – Mark (X) only one category. 5 Professional (Social worker/psychiatrist) 6 Custodial care 7 Other – Specify Teaching Profession – Were you employed in a – 8 Preschool 9 Elementary 10 Junior high or middle school 11 High school 12 College or university 13 Technical or industrial school 14 Special education facility 15 Other – Specify Law Enforcement or Security Field – Were you employed as a – 16 Law enforcement officer 17 Prison or jail guard 18 Security guard 19 Other – Specify Retail Sales – Were you employed as a – 20 Convenience or liquor store clerk 21 Gas station attendant 22 Bartender 23 Other – Specify Transportation Field – Were you employed as a – 24 Bus driver 25 Taxi cab driver 26 Other – Specify OR 27 Something else – Specify ASK OR VERIFY – 580 1 A private company, business, or individual for wages?48b. Is your job with (Read answer categories) – 2 The Federal government? 3 A State, county, or local government? 4 Yourself (Self-employed) in your own business, professional practice, or farm? If box 12 is marked in 48a, mark without asking. 581 1 Yes48c. Are you employed by a college or university? 2 No 48d. While working at your job, do you work mostly in 582 1 A city?(Read answer categories) – 2 Suburban area? 3 Rural area? 4 Combination of any of these? CHECK Is this the last household member to be Yes – END interview.ITEM I interviewed? No – See note below before interviewing next household member. FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – If the current respondent is a parent or legal guardian and the next household member to be interviewed is under 18, tell the current respondent that you will be asking the same questions you just asked him/her. FORM NCVS-1 (4-24-2000)Page 20 INDIVIDUAL’S PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS Noninterview (Type Z) – Fill 19–28 on this page and 14 on cover page 5 17. NAME Last First Type of interview Line No. 401 1 2 3 4 Per. – Self-respondent Tel. – Self-respondent Per. – Proxy Tel. – Proxy 18. 19. Fill 13 on cover page ________ Line No. ...402 AFTER INTERVIEW – TRANSCRIBE FROM CONTROL CARD 20. Relationship to reference person 21. Age last birthday 22a. Marital status THIS survey period 22b. Marital status LAST survey period 23. Sex 24. Armed Forces member 25a. Education -highest grade 25b. Education -complete that year? 27. Race 28. Hispanic origin 403 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 Husband Wife Son Daughter Father Mother Brother Sister Other relative Nonrelative Ref. person ________ Age 405 1 2 3 4 5 Married Widowed Divorced Separated Never married 406 1 2 3 4 5 Married Widowed Divorced Separated Never married Not interviewed last survey period 6 407 1 2 M F 408 1 2 Yes No 410 1 2 Yes No 413 1 2 Yes No 404 _________ Grade 409 412 1 2 3 White Black Amer. Indian, Aleut, Eskimo Asian, Pacific Islander Other 4 5 26. Attending school 411 1 College/ University Trade school Vocational school 4 None of the above schools 2 3 (cc 13b) (cc 17) (cc 18) (From previous enumeration) (cc 19) (cc 20) (cc 21a) (cc 21b) (cc 22) (cc 23) (cc 24) Regular school 0 29. 33a. Date of interview 501If unsure, ASK OR VERIFY – How long have you lived at this address? (Enter number of months OR years.) ____________ Months (1-11) – SKIP to 33b505 OR ____________ Years (Round to nearest whole year) – Fill Check Item A 506 5 years or more – SKIP to 36a Less than 5 years – Ask 33b CHECK ITEM A How many years are entered in 33a? 33b. Altogether, how many times have you moved in the last 5 years, that is, since _________________, 19 ___? ____________ Number of times508 Month Day Year MOBILITY QUESTIONS Before we get to the crime questions, I have one or two questions that are helpful in studying where and why crimes occur. INDIVIDUAL’S PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS Noninterview (Type Z) – Fill 19–28 on this page and 14 on cover page 5 17. NAME Last First Type of interview Line No. 401 1 2 3 4 Per. – Self-respondent Tel. – Self-respondent Per. – Proxy Tel. – Proxy 18. 19. Fill 13 on cover page ________ Line No. ...402 AFTER INTERVIEW – TRANSCRIBE FROM CONTROL CARD 20. Relationship to reference person 21. Age last birthday 22a. Marital status THIS survey period 22b. Marital status LAST survey period 23. Sex 24. Armed Forces member 25a. Education -highest grade 25b. Education -complete that year? 27. Race 28. Hispanic origin 403 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 Husband Wife Son Daughter Father Mother Brother Sister Other relative Nonrelative Ref. person ________ Age 405 1 2 3 4 5 Married Widowed Divorced Separated Never married 406 1 2 3 4 5 Married Widowed Divorced Separated Never married Not interviewed last survey period 6 407 1 2 M F 408 1 2 Yes No 410 1 2 Yes No 413 1 2 Yes No 404 _________ Grade 409 412 1 2 3 White Black Amer. Indian, Aleut, Eskimo Asian, Pacific Islander Other 4 5 26. Attending school 411 1 College/ University Trade school Vocational school 4 None of the above schools 2 3 (cc 13b) (cc 17) (cc 18) (From previous enumeration) (cc 19) (cc 20) (cc 21a) (cc 21b) (cc 22) (cc 23) (cc 24) Regular school 0 29. 33a. Date of interview 501If unsure, ASK OR VERIFY – How long have you lived at this address? (Enter number of months OR years.) ____________ Months (1-11) – SKIP to 33b505 OR ____________ Years (Round to nearest whole year) – Fill Check Item A 506 5 years or more – SKIP to 36a Less than 5 years – Ask 33b CHECK ITEM A How many years are entered in 33a? 33b. Altogether, how many times have you moved in the last 5 years, that is, since _________________, 19 ___? ____________ Number of times508 Month Day Year MOBILITY QUESTIONS Before we get to the crime questions, I have one or two questions that are helpful in studying where and why crimes occur. FORM NCVS-1 (4-24-2000) Page 21 INDIVIDUAL’S SCREEN QUESTIONS 36a. I’m going to read some examples that will give you an idea of the kinds of crimes this study covers. As I go through them, tell me if any of these happened to you in the last 6 months, that is since __________ ______, 20 ____. Was something belonging to YOU stolen, such as – (a) Things that you carry, like luggage, a wallet, purse, briefcase, book – (b) Clothing, jewelry, or calculator – (c) Bicycle or sports equipment – (d) Things in your home – like a TV, stereo, or tools – (e) Things from a vehicle, such as a package, groceries, camera, or cassette tapes – OR (f) Did anyone ATTEMPT to steal anything belonging to you? 40a. (Other than any incidents already mentioned,) since __________ ______, 20 ____, were you attacked or threatened OR did you have something stolen from you – (a) At home including the porch or yard – (b) At or near a friend’s, relative’s, or neighbor’s home – (c) At work or school – (d) In places such as a storage shed or laundry room, a shopping mall, restaurant, bank, or airport – (e) While riding in any vehicle – (f) On the street or in a parking lot – (g) At such places as a party, theater, gym, picnic area, bowling lanes, or while fishing or hunting – OR (h) Did anyone ATTEMPT to attack or ATTEMPT to steal anything belonging to you from any of these places? Briefly describe incident(s) Briefly describe incident(s) 36b. Did any incidents of this type happen to you? MARK OR ASK – 36c. How many times? 1 Yes – What happened?532 Number of times (36c) 533 No – SKIP to 40a2 Describe above 40b. Did any incidents of this type happen to you? MARK OR ASK – 40c. How many times? 1 Yes – What happened?539 Number of times (40c) 540 No – SKIP to 41a2 Describe above FORM NCVS-1 (4-24-2000)Page 22 INDIVIDUAL’S SCREEN QUESTIONS 41a. (Other than any incidents already mentioned,) has anyone attacked or threatened you in any of these ways (Exclude telephone threats) – (a) With any weapon, for instance, a gun or knife – (b) With anything like a baseball bat, frying pan, scissors, or stick – (c) By something thrown, such as a rock or bottle – (d) Include any grabbing, punching, or choking, (e) Any rape, attempted rape or other type of sexual attack – (f) Any face to face threats – OR (g) Any attack or threat or use of force by anyone at all? Please mention it even if you are not certain it was a crime. MARK OR ASK – 41b. Did any incidents of this type happen to you? 41c. How many times? 42a. People often don’t think of incidents committed by someone they know. (Other than any incidents already mentioned,) did you have something stolen from you OR were you attacked or threatened by (Exclude telephone threats) – (a) Someone at work or school – (b) A neighbor or friend – (c) A relative or family member – (d) Any other person you’ve met or known? MARK OR ASK – 42b. Did any incidents of this type happen to you? 42c. How many times? 43a. Incidents involving forced or unwanted sexual acts are often difficult to talk about. (Other than any incidents already mentioned,) have you been forced or coerced to engage in unwanted sexual activity by – (a) Someone you didn’t know before – (b) A casual acquaintance – OR (c) Someone you know well? MARK OR ASK – 43b. Did any incidents of this type happen to you? 43c. How many times? Briefly describe incident(s) 541 1 2 542 Briefly describe incident(s) 543 1 2 544 Briefly describe incident(s) 545 1 2 546 Yes – What happened? Describe above No – SKIP to 42a Number of times (41c) Yes – What happened? Describe above No – SKIP to 43a Number of times (42c) Yes – What happened? Describe above No – SKIP to 44a Number of times (43c) FORM NCVS-1 (4-24-2000) Page 23 INDIVIDUAL’S SCREEN QUESTIONS 44a. During the last 6 months, (other than any incidents already mentioned,) did you call the police to report something that happened to YOU which you thought was a crime? CHECK ITEM B Look at 44a. If unsure, ASK, otherwise, mark without asking. Were you (was the respondent) attacked or threatened, or was something stolen or an attempt made to steal something that belonged to you (the respondent) or another household member? 44b. How many times? 45a. During the last 6 months, (other than any incidents already mentioned,) did anything which you thought was a crime happen to YOU, but you did NOT report to the police? CHECK ITEM C Look at 45a. If unsure, ASK, otherwise, mark without asking. Were you (was the respondent) attacked or threatened, or was something stolen or an attempt made to steal something that belonged to you (the respondent) or another household member? 45b. How many times? CHECK Who besides the respondent was present when theITEM D screen questions were asked? (If telephone interview, mark box 1 only.) CHECK ITEM E CHECK ITEM G If self-response interview, SKIP to Check Item G. Did the person for whom this interview was taken help the proxy respondent answer any screen questions? Transcribe "number of times" entry for each of the following: (a) Screen Question, Item 36c, page 22 (b) Screen Question, Item 40c, page 22 (c) Screen Question, Item 41c, page 23 (d) Screen Question, Item 42c, page 23 (e) Screen Question, Item 43c, page 23 (f) Screen Question, Item 44b, page 24 (g) Screen Question, Item 45b, page 24 Briefly describe incident(s) 547 1 2 Yes – What happened? Describe above No – SKIP to 45a 548 * OFFICE USE ONLY 549 1 2 Yes – Ask 44b No – SKIP to 45a 550 Number of times (44b) Briefly describe incident(s) 551 1 2 Yes – What happened? Describe above No – SKIP to Check Item D 552 * OFFICE USE ONLY 553 1 2 Yes – Ask 45b No – SKIP to Check Item D 554 Number of times (45b) 555 1 Telephone interview – SKIP to Check Item G * Personal interview – Mark all that apply. 2 No one besides respondent present 3 Respondent’s spouse 4 HHLD member(s) 12+, not spouse 5 HHLD member(s) under 12 6 Nonhousehold member(s) 7 Someone was present – Can’t say who 8 Don’t know if someone else present 556 1 Yes 2 No 3 Person for whom interview taken not present No entries transcribed below – Go to Check Item H ____________ Number of times (36c) ____________ Number of times (40c) ____________ Number of times (41c) ____________ Number of times (42c) ____________ Number of times (43c) ____________ Number of times (44b) ____________ Number of times (45b) FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – After completing Check Item G, fill a separate crime incident report for each screen question that has an entry of 1 or more. Do this before marking Check Item H. FORM NCVS-1 (4-24-2000)Page 24 INDIVIDUAL’S EMPLOYMENT QUESTIONS Be sure to fill any incident reports before marking Check Item H. CHECK ITEM H Is the respondent 16 years or older? 47a. 47b. 47c. Did you have a job or work at a business LAST WEEK? (Do not include volunteer work or work around the house.) (If farm or business operator in household, ask about unpaid work.) ASK OR VERIFY – Did you have a job or work at a business DURING THE LAST 6 MONTHS? Did that (job/work) last 2 consecutive weeks or more? ASK OR VERIFY – 48a. Which of the following best describes your job? PERSONAL INTERVIEW (Show flashcard) TELEPHONE INTERVIEW – Were you employed in the (Read main headings until you get a yes. Then read answer categories) – Mark (X) only one category. ASK OR VERIFY – 48b. Is your job with (Read answer categories) – If box 12 is marked in 48a, mark without asking.48c. Are you employed by a college or university? 48d. While working at your job, do you work mostly in (Read answer categories) – CHECK ITEM I Is this the last household member to be interviewed? 1 Yes – Ask 47a 2 No – SKIP to Check Item I 576 1 Yes – SKIP to 48a 2 No – Ask 47b 577 1 Yes – Ask 47c 2 No – SKIP to Check Item I 578 1 Yes – Ask 48a 2 No – SKIP to Check Item I Medical Profession – As a – 1 Physician579 2 Nurse 3 Technician 4 Other – Specify Mental Health Services Field – Are your duties – 5 Professional (Social worker/psychiatrist) 6 Custodial care 7 Other – Specify Teaching Profession – Were you employed in a – 8 Preschool 9 Elementary 10 Junior high or middle school 11 High school 12 College or university 13 Technical or industrial school 14 Special education facility 15 Other – Specify Law Enforcement or Security Field – Were you employed as a – 16 Law enforcement officer 17 Prison or jail guard 18 Security guard 19 Other – Specify Retail Sales – Were you employed as a – 20 Convenience or liquor store clerk 21 Gas station attendant 22 Bartender 23 Other – Specify Transportation Field – Were you employed as a – 24 Bus driver 25 Taxi cab driver 26 Other – Specify OR 27 Something else – Specify 580 1 2 3 4 A private company, business, or individual for wages? The Federal government? A State, county, or local government? Yourself (Self-employed) in your own business, professional practice, or farm? 581 1 2 Yes No 582 1 2 3 4 A city? Suburban area? Rural area? Combination of any of these? Yes – END interview. No – See note below before interviewing next household member. FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – If the current respondent is a parent or legal guardian and the next household member to be interviewed is under 18, tell the current respondent that you will be asking the same questions you just asked him/her. FORM NCVS-1 (4-24-2000) Page 25 NOTES FORM NCVS-1 (4-24-2000)Page 26 OMB No. 1121-0111: Approval Expires 05/15/2003 NOTICE – Your report to the Census Bureau is confidential by law (U.S. Code 42, Sections 3789g and 3735). All identifiable information will be used only by persons engaged in and for the purposes of the survey, and may not be disclosed or released to others for any purpose. FORM NCVS-2 (5-1-2000) U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE Economics and Statistics Administration U.S. CENSUS BUREAU ACTING AS COLLECTING AGENT FOR THE BUREAU OF JUSTICE STATISTICS U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE CRIME INCIDENT REPORT NATIONAL CRIME VICTIMIZATION SURVEY 1a. LINE NUMBER OF RESPONDENT 1b. SCREEN QUESTION NUMBER 1c. INCIDENT NUMBER CHECK ITEM A Has the respondent lived at this address for more than 6 months? (If not sure, refer to 33a on the NCVS-1 or ASK.) 2. You said that during the last 6 months – (Refer to appropriate screen question for description of crime.) Did (this/the first) incident happen while you were living here or before you moved to this address? 3. (You said that during the last 6 months – (Refer to appropriate screen question for description of crime.)) In what month did (this/the first) incident happen? (Show calendar if necessary. Encourage respondent to give exact month.) 4. If known, mark without asking. If not sure, ASK – Altogether, how many times did this type of incident happen during the last 6 months? CHECK ITEM B How many incidents? (Refer to 4.) CHECK ITEM C Are these incidents similar to each other in detail, or are they for different types of crimes? (If not sure, ASK.) CHECK ITEM D Can you (respondent) recall enough details of each incident to distinguish them from each other? (If not sure, ASK.) 5. The following questions refer only to the most recent incident. (ASK item 6.) 6. About what time did (this/the most recent) incident happen? Sample J _____ Notes 601 602 603 605 1 2 606 607 Control number PSU Segment Line number (ex., 01) Screen question number (ex., 39) Incident number (ex., 01) Yes (more than 6 months) – SKIP to 3 No (6 months or less) – Ask 2 While living at this address Before moving to this address Month Year HH CK Serial No. ____________ Number of incidents 608 1 2 1–5 incidents (not a "series") – SKIP to 6 6 or more incidents – Fill Check Item C 609 1 2 Similar – Fill Check Item D Different (not a "series") – SKIP to 6 610 1 2 Yes (not a "series") – SKIP to 6 No (is a "series") – Reduce entry in screen question if necessary – Read 5 612 1 2 3 4 During day After 6 a.m. – 12 noon After 12 noon – 3 p.m. After 3 p.m. – 6 p.m. Don’t know what time of day At night 5 6 7 8 After 6 p.m. – 9 p.m. After 9 p.m. – 12 midnight After 12 midnight – 6 a.m. Don’t know what time of night Or 9 Don’t know whether day or night N C V S 2 I N C I D E N T R E P O R T 7. In what city, town, or village did 613 1 Outside U.S. – SKIP to 10this incident occur? 2 Not inside a city/town/village – Ask 8a 3 SAME city/town/village as present residence – SKIP to 9 4 DIFFERENT city/town/village from present residence – Specify..Ask 8a 8a. In what county and state did it occur? 8b. Is this the same county and state as your present residence? 9. Did this incident occur on an Indian Reservation or on Indian Lands? 10. Where did this incident happen? Mark (X) only one box. 5 Don’t know – Ask 8a 614 County ________________ State __________ 615 1 Yes 2 No 633 1 Yes 2 No IN RESPONDENT’S HOME OR LODGING 616 1 In own dwelling, own attached garage, or enclosed porch (Include illegal entry or attempted illegal entry of same) 2 In detached building on own property, such as detached garage, storage shed, etc. (Include illegal . ... .....Ask 11 SKIP to 18 SKIP to 18 . ... ..SKIP to 17 c SKIP to 17 c entry or attempted illegal entry of same) 3 In vacation home/second home (Include illegal entry or attempted illegal entry of same) 4 In hotel or motel room respondent was staying in (Include illegal entry or attempted illegal entry of same) NEAR OWN HOME 5 Own yard, sidewalk, driveway, carport, unenclosed porch (does not include apartment yards) 6 Apartment hall, storage area, laundry room (does not include apartment parking lot/garage) 7 On street immediately adjacent to own home AT, IN, OR NEAR A FRIEND’S/RELATIVE’S/ NEIGHBOR’S HOME 8 At or in home or other building on their property 9 Yard, sidewalk, driveway, carport (does not include apartment yards) 10 Apartment hall, storage area, laundry room (does not include apartment parking lot/garage) 11 On street immediately adjacent to their home COMMERCIAL PLACES 12 Inside restaurant, bar, nightclub 13 Inside other commercial building such as store, bank, gas station 14 Inside office, factory, or warehouse PARKING LOTS/GARAGES 15 Commercial parking lot/garage 16 Noncommercial parking lot/garage 17 Apartment/townhouse parking lot/garage SCHOOL ... 18 Inside school building SKIP to 17a 19 On school property (school parking area, play area, school bus, etc.) SKIP to 17c OPEN AREAS, ON STREET OR PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SKIP to 18 20 In apartment yard, park, field, playground (other than school) 21 On the street (other than immediately adjacent to own/friend’s/relative’s/neighbor’s home) 22 On public transportation or in station (bus, train, plane, airport, depot, etc.) OTHER 23Other – Specify... SKIP to 17 c FORM NCVS-2 (5-1-2000)Page 2 11. Did the offender live (here/there) or have a right to be (here/there), for instance, as a guest or a repairperson? 617 1 2 3 Yes – SKIP to 19 No Ask 12 Don’t know . . . 12. Did the offender actually get INSIDE your (house/apartment /room/garage/ shed/ enclosed porch)? 618 1 2 3 Yes – SKIP to 14 No Ask 13 Don’t know . . . 13. Did the offender TRY to get in your (house/apartment/room/garage/shed/ enclosed porch)? 619 1 2 3 Yes – Ask 14 No – SKIP to 19 Don’t know – Ask 14 14. Was there any evidence, such as a broken lock or broken window, that the offender(s) (got in by force/TRIED to get in by force)? 620 1 2 Yes – Ask 15 No – SKIP to 16 15. What was the evidence? Anything else? Mark (X) all that apply. 625 * 626 * 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 . . . Window Damage to window (include frame, glass broken/removed/cracked) Screen damaged/removed Lock on window damaged/tampered with in some way Other – SpecifyDoor Damage to door (include frame, glass panes or door removed) SKIP to 19Screen damaged/removed Lock or door handle damaged/tampered with in some way Other – Specify Other Other than window or door – Specify 16. How did the offender (get in/TRY to get in)? Mark (X) only one box. 627 1 2 3 45 6 7 8 9 . . . Let in Offender pushed his/her way in after door opened Through OPEN DOOR or other opening Through UNLOCKED door or window Through LOCKED door or window – Had key SKIPThrough LOCKED door or window – Picked to 19lock, used credit card, etc., other than key Through LOCKED door or window – Don’t know how Don’t know Other – Specify 17a. Was it your school? 628 1 2 Yes No – SKIP to 17c 17b. In what part of the school building did it happen? 629 1 2 3 4 Classroom Hallway/Stairwell Bathroom/Locker room Other (library, gym, auditorium, cafeteria) 17c. ASK OR VERIFY – Did the incident happen in an area restricted to certain people or was it open to the public at the time? 630 1 2 3 4 Open to the public Restricted to certain people (or nobody had a right to be there) Don’t know Other – Specify 18. ASK OR VERIFY – Did it happen outdoors, indoors, or both? 631 1 2 3 Indoors (inside a building or enclosed space) Outdoors Both 19. ASK OR VERIFY – How far away from home did this happen? PROBE – Was it within a mile, 5 miles, 50 miles or more? Mark (X) first box that respondent is sure of. 632 1 2 3 4 5 6 At, in, or near the building containing the respondent’s home/next door A mile or less Five miles or less Fifty miles or less More than 50 miles Don’t know how far FORM NCVS-2 (5-1-2000) Page 3 20a. ASK OR VERIFY – Were you or any other member of this household present when this incident occurred? 634 1 2 Yes – Ask 20b No – SKIP to 56, page 8 20b. ASK OR VERIFY – 635Which household members were 1 Respondent onlypresent? 2 Ask 21Respondent and other household member(s) ..FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – If proxy interview, "Respondent" refers to the person for whom the proxy interview is taken, not the proxy respondent. 21. ASK OR VERIFY – Did you personally see an offender? FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – If proxy interview, replace "you" with the name of person for whom the proxy interview is being taken in 21–115. 22. Did the offender have a weapon such as a gun or knife, or something to use 3 Only other household member(s), not respondent – SKIP to 59, page 8 636 1 Yes 2 No 637 1 Yes – Ask 23 as a weapon, such as a bottle or 2 No..SKIP to 24wrench? 3 Don’t know 23. What was the weapon? Anything else? Mark (X) all that apply. 24. Did the offender hit you, knock you down or actually attack you in any way? 25. Did the offender TRY to attack you? 26. Did the offender THREATEN you with harm in any way? 27. What actually happened? Anything else? Mark (X) all that apply. FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – If box 4, ASK – Do you mean forced or coerced sexual intercourse including attempts? If "Yes," change entry in Item 24 to "Yes." Delete entries in 25–27. ... 638 1 Hand gun (pistol, revolver, etc.) 2 Other gun (rifle, shotgun, etc.)* 3 Knife 4 Other sharp object (scissors, ice pick, axe, etc.) 5 Blunt object (rock, club, blackjack, etc.) 6 Other – Specify SKIPForcible entry or attempted forcible entry of to 40, page 6 639 1 Yes – SKIP to 29, page 5 2 No – Ask 25 640 1 Yes – SKIP to 28a 2 No – Ask 26 641 1 Yes – SKIP to 28b 2 No – Ask 27 642 1 Something taken without permission 2 Attempted or threatened to take something* 3 Harassed, argument, abusive language 4 Unwanted sexual contact with force (grabbing, fondling, etc.) 5 Unwanted sexual contact without force (grabbing, fondling, etc.) 6 28a. How did the offender TRY to attack you? Any other way? 28b. How were you threatened? Any other way? Mark (X) all that apply. FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – If box 5, ASK – Do you mean forced or coerced sexual intercourse including attempts? * house/apartment 7 Forcible entry or attempted forcible entry of car 8 Damaged or destroyed property 9 Attempted or threatened to damage or destroy property 10 Other – Specify 643 1 Verbal threat of rape 2 Verbal threat to kill* 3 Verbal threat of attack other than to kill or rape 4 Verbal threat of sexual assault other than rape 5 Unwanted sexual contact with force (grabbing, fondling, etc.) 6 Unwanted sexual contact without force (grabbing, fondling, etc.) 644 7 Weapon present or threatened with weapon 8 Shot at (but missed) ... SKIP to 40, page 6 FORM NCVS-2 (5-1-2000)Page 4 9 Attempted attack with knife/sharp weaponIf "Yes," change entry in Item 24 to 10 Attempted attack with weapon other than"Yes." Delete entries in 25–28. gun/knife/sharp weapon 645 11 Object thrown at person 12 Followed or surrounded* 13 Tried to hit, slap, knock down, grab, hold, trip, jump, push, etc. 14 Other – Specify 29. How were you attacked? Any other way? 646 1 RapedMark (X) all that apply. 2 Tried to rape* 3 Sexual assault other than rape or attempted rapeFIELD REPRESENTATIVE – If raped, ASK – 4 Shot Do you mean forced or coerced sexual 5 Shot at (but missed)intercourse? 6 Hit with gun held in hand 7 Stabbed/cut with knife/sharp weaponIf No, ASK – What do you mean? 647 8 Attempted attack with knife/sharp weapon* 9 Hit by object (other than gun) held in hand If tried to rape, ASK – 10 Hit by thrown object 11 Attempted attack with weapon other thanDo you mean attempted forced or coerced 648 gun/knife/sharp weapon* sexual intercourse? 12 Hit, slapped, knocked downIf No, ASK – What do you mean? 13 Grabbed, held, tripped, jumped, pushed, etc. 14 Other – Specify 30. Did the offender THREATEN to hurt you before you were actually attacked? 649 1 Yes 2 No 3 Other – Specify 31. What were the injuries you suffered, if any? Anything else? 655 1 None – SKIP to 40 Mark (X) all that apply. 2 Raped* 3 Attempted rape 4 Sexual assault other than rape or attempted rapeFIELD REPRESENTATIVE – If raped and box 1 in item 29 is NOT marked, ASK – 5 Knife or stab wounds 6 Gun shot, bullet woundsDo you mean forced or coerced sexual intercourse? 7 Broken bones or teeth knocked out 8 656 Internal injuriesIf No, ASK – What do you mean? * 9 Knocked unconscious 10 Bruises, black eye, cuts, scratches,If attempted rape and box 2 in item 29 is NOT swelling, chipped teeth 11 marked, ASK – Other – SpecifyDo you mean attempted forced or coerced sexual intercourse? If No, ASK – What do you mean? 32. ASK OR VERIFY – Were any of the injuries caused by a 657 1 Yes – Ask 33 weapon other than a gun or knife? 2 No – SKIP to 34 33. Which injuries were caused by a weapon OTHER than a gun or knife? 658 *Enter code(s) from 31. Code Code Code 34. Were you injured to the extent that you received any medical care, including self 659 1 Yes – Ask 35 treatment? 2 No – SKIP to 40 Where did you receive this care? Anywhere35. else? 660 1 At the scene Mark (X) all that apply. 2 At home/neighbor’s/friend’s* 3 Health unit at work/school, first aid station at a stadium/park, etc. 4 Doctor’s office/health clinic 5 Emergency room at hospital/emergency clinic 6 Hospital (other than emergency room) 7 Other – Specify CHECK ITEM E Is (box 6) "Hospital" marked in 35? Yes – Ask 36 No – SKIP to 38 36. Did you stay overnight in the hospital? 662 1 Yes – Ask 37 2 No – SKIP to 38 37. How many days did you stay (in the hospital)? 663 ____________ Number of days FORM NCVS-2 (5-1-2000) Page 5 38. At the time of the incident, were you covered by any medical insurance, or were 664 1 Yes 39. 40. you eligible for benefits from any other type of health benefits program, such as medicaid, Veterans Administration, or Public Welfare? What was the total amount of your medical expenses resulting from this incident (INCLUDING anything paid by insurance)? Include hospital and doctor bills, medicine, therapy, braces, and any other injury related expenses. FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – Obtain an estimate, if necessary. Did you do anything with the idea of protecting YOURSELF or your PROPERTY 665 666 2 No 3 Don’t know 00$ ____________ . Total amount 0 No cost X Don’t know 1 Yes – SKIP to 42 while the incident was going on? 2 No/took no action/kept still – Ask 41 41. Was there anything you did or tried to do about the incident while it was going on? 667 1 Yes – Ask 42 2 No/took no action/kept still – SKIP to 47 42. What did you do? Anything else? USED PHYSICAL FORCE TOWARD OFFENDER Mark (X) all that apply. Then fill Check Item F. 668 1 Attacked offender with gun; fired gun * 2 3 4 5 6 Attacked with other weapon Attacked without weapon (hit, kicked, etc.) Threatened offender with gun Threatened offender with other weapon Threatened to injure, no weapon RESISTED OR CAPTURED OFFENDER 669 * 7 8 Defended self or property (struggled, ducked, blocked blows, held onto property) Chased, tried to catch or hold offender SCARED OR WARNED OFF OFFENDER 9 Yelled at offender, turned on lights, threatened to call police, etc. PERSUADED OR APPEASED OFFENDER 10 Cooperated, or pretended to (stalled, did what they asked) 11 Argued, reasoned, pleaded, bargained, etc.670 * ESCAPED OR GOT AWAY 12 Ran or drove away, or tried; hid, locked door GOT HELP OR GAVE ALARM 13 Called police or guard 14 Tried to attract attention or help, warn others (cried out for help, called children inside)* 671 REACTED TO PAIN OR EMOTION 15 Screamed from pain or fear OTHER 16 Other – Specify CHECK ITEM F Was the respondent injured in this Yes – Ask 43aincident? (Is box 2–11 marked in No – SKIP to 43b31 on page 5?) 43a. Did you take these actions before, after, or at the same time that you were injured? 672 1 Actions taken before injury Mark (X) all that apply. * 2 Actions taken after injury 3 Actions taken at same time as injury 43b. Did (any of) your action(s) help the 673situation in any way? 1 Yes – Ask 44 2 NoProbe – Did your actions help you avoid SKIP to 453 Don’t knowinjury, protect your property, escape from the offender – or were they helpful in some other way? ... FORM NCVS-2 (5-1-2000)Page 6 44. How were they helpful? Any other way? Mark (X) all that apply. 45. Did (any of) your action(s) make the situation worse in any way? 674 * 1 2 Helped avoid injury or greater injury to respondent Scared or chased offender off 3 4 5 6 Helped respondent get away from offender Protected property Protected other people Other – Specify 675 1 Yes – Ask 46 2 No... SKIP to 47PROBE – Did your actions lead to injury, 3 Don’t know greater injury, loss of property, make the offender angrier, or make the situation worse in some other way? 46. How did they make the situation worse? 676 1 Led to injury or greater injury to respondentAny other way? Mark (X) all that apply. 2 Caused greater loss of property or damage to property* 3 Other people got hurt (worse) 4 Offender got away 5 Made offender angrier, more aggressive, etc. 6 Other – Specify 47. Was anyone present during the incident 677 1 Yes – Ask 48besides you and the offender? (Other 2 No... than children under age 12.) SKIP to Check Item G3 Don’t know 48. Did the actions of (this person/any of 678 1 Yes – Ask 49these people) help the situation in any 2 No... way? SKIP to 503 Don’t know 49. How did they help the situation? Any other way? Mark (X) all that apply. 50. Did the actions of (this person/any of these people) make the situation worse 679 * 1 2 Helped avoid injury or greater injury to respondent Scared or chased offender off 3 4 5 6 Helped respondent get away from offender Protected property Protected other people Other – Specify 680 1 Yes – Ask 51 in any way? 2 No... SKIP to 523 Don’t know 51. How did they make the situation worse? 681 1 Led to injury or greater injury to respondentAny other way? 2 Caused greater loss of property or damage to property* 3 Other people got hurt (worse) 4 Offender got away 5 Made offender angrier, more aggressive, etc. 6 Other – Specify Mark (X) all that apply. 52. Not counting yourself, were any of the persons present during the incident harmed 682 1 Yes – Ask 53 (Pause), threatened with harm (Pause), or 2 Norobbed by force or threat of harm? (Do not... SKIP to Check Item G3 Don’t knowinclude yourself, the offender, or children under 12 years of age.) 53. How many? (Do not include yourself, the offender or children under 12 years of 683 ____________ Number of persons 0 None age.) 54. How many of these persons are 684members of your household now? (Do not include yourself, the offender or children under 12 years of age.) ____________ Number of persons Name(s) OR Line number(s)FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – Enter name(s) or line number(s) of other household member(s). If not sure, ask. FORM NCVS-2 (5-1-2000) Page 7 CHECK ITEM G CHECK ITEM G 685 1 Yes – Ask 55Did respondent use or threaten to use physical force against the offender? 2 No – SKIP to 60 (Is box 1–6 marked in 42 on page 6?) 55. Who was the first to use or threaten to use 686 1 Respondentphysical force – you, the offender, or 2 Offender(s)someone else?..SKIP to 603 Someone else Mark (X) only one box. 4 Don’t know 56. If household member was present, SKIP to 59. 687 1 Yes – Ask 57 Do you know or have you learned anything 2 No – SKIP to 88, page 11about the offender(s) – for instance, whether there was one or more than one offender involved, whether it was someone young or old, or male or female? 57. How sure are you of this information? Do 688 you have a suspicion, are you fairly sure or are you certain? 1 Suspicion 2 Fairly sure 3 Certain 58. How did you learn about the offender(s)? Any other way? Mark (X) all that apply. 689 1 Respondent saw or heard offender * 2 From other member of household who was eyewitness 3 From eyewitness(es) other than household member(s) 4 From police 5 Other person (not eyewitness) 6 Offender(s) admitted it 690 7 Offender(s) had threatened to do it ... SKIP to 88, page 11 8 Stolen property found on offender’s* property or in offender’s possession 9 Figured it out by who had motive, opportunity, or had done it before 10 Other – Specify 59. What actually happened? Anything else? 691 1 Something taken without permissionMark (X) all that apply. 2 Attempted or threatened to take something* 60. ASK OR VERIFY – Was the crime committed by only one or by more than one offender? 61. Do you know anything about one of the offenders? Notes 3 Harassed, argument, abusive language 4 Forcible entry or attempted forcible entry of house/apartment 5 Forcible entry or attempted forcible entry of car 6 Damaged or destroyed property 7 Attempted or threatened to damage or destroy property 8 Other – Specify 692 1 2 3 Only one – SKIP to 62 More than one – SKIP to 73 Don’t know – Ask 61 693 1 2 Yes – Ask 62 No – SKIP to 88, page 11 FORM NCVS-2 (5-1-2000)Page 8 62. Was the offender male or female? 63. How old would you say the offender was? 64a. Was the offender a member of a street gang, or don’t you know? 64b. Was the offender drinking or on drugs, or don’t you know? 698 1 Male 2 Female 3 Don’t know 1 Under 12 5 21–29699 2 12–14 6 30+ 3 15–17 7 Don’t know 4 18–20 1 Yes (a member of a street gang)700 2 No (not a member of a street gang) 3 Don’t know (if a member of a street gang) 1 Yes (drinking or on drugs) – Ask 65701 2 No (not drinking/not on drugs)..SKIP to 663 Don’t know (if drinking or on drugs) 65. Which was it? (Drinking or on drugs?) 702 1 Drinking 2 On drugs 3 Both (drinking and on drugs) 4 Drinking or on drugs – could not tell which 66. Was the offender someone you knew or 703 1 Knew or had seen before – SKIP to 68a stranger you had never seen before? 2 Stranger 3 Don’t know 67. Would you be able to recognize the 704 1 Yesoffender if you saw him/her? 2 Not sure (possibly or probably) 3 No – SKIP to 71 ..SKIP to 69 68. How well did you know the offender – 705 1 Sight only – Ask 69by sight only, casual acquaintance, or 2 Casual acquaintancewell known? 69. Would you have been able to tell the police how they might find the offender, for instance, where he/she 3 Well known 706 1 Yes 2 No... Other – Specify ... SKIP to 70 3lived, worked, went to school, or spent time? 70. How did you know the offender? For example, was the offender a friend, SKIP to 71 RELATIVE 1cousin, etc.? 707 Spouse at time of incident Mark (X) first box that applies. 71. Was the offender White, Black, or some other race? 72. Was this the only time this offender 2 Ex-spouse at time of incident 3 Parent or step-parent 4 Own child or step-child 5 Brother/sister 6 Other relative – Specify NONRELATIVE 7 Boyfriend or girlfriend, ex-boyfriend or ex-girlfriend 8 Friend or ex-friend 9 Roommate, boarder 10 Schoolmate 11 Neighbor 12 Someone at work, customer 13 Other nonrelative – Specify 708 1 2 3 4 White Black Other – Specify Don’t know 709 1 Yes (only time)... SKIP to 88, page 11committed a crime against you or your 2household or made threats against you or your household? No (there were other times) 3 Don’t know 73. How many offenders? 710 Number of offenders x Don’t know (number of offenders) Notes FORM NCVS-2 (5-1-2000) Page 9 CHECK ITEM H 74. Were they male or female? 75. If there were only 2 offenders (item 73), SKIP to 76. Were they mostly male or mostly female? 76. How old would you say the youngest was? 77. How old would you say the oldest was? 78a. Were any of the offenders a member of a street gang, or don’t you know? 78b. Were any of the offenders drinking or on drugs, or don’t you know? 79. Which was it? (Drinking or on drugs?) 80. Were any of the offenders known to you, or were they strangers you had never seen before? 81. Would you be able to recognize any of them if you saw them? 82. How well did you know the offender(s) – by sight only, casual acquaintance or well known? Mark (X) all that apply. Is "casual acquaintance" or "well known" marked in 82? 83. Would you have been able to tell the police how they might find any of them, for instance, where they lived, worked, went to school, or spent time? Mark (X) only one box. 84. How did you know them? For example, were they friends, cousins, etc.? Mark (X) all that apply. 85. Were the offenders White, Black, or some other race? Mark (X) all that apply. 86. If only one box marked in 85, SKIP to 87. What race were most of the offenders? 711 1 All male 2 All female SKIP to 76 3 Don’t know sex of any offenders 4 Both male and female – Ask 75 . . . 712 1 Mostly male ..2 Mostly female . . . 3 Evenly divided . . . 4 Don’t know 713 1 Under 12 5 21–29 2 12–14 6 30+ – SKIP to 78a 3 15–17 7 Don’t know 4 18–20 . . . . . . 714 1 Under 12 5 21–29 2 12–14 6 30+ 3 15–17 7 Don’t know 4 18–20 715 1 Yes (a member of a street gang) 2 No (not a member of a street gang) 3 Don’t know (if a member of a street gang) 716 1 Yes (drinking or on drugs) – Ask 79 2 No (not drinking/not on drugs) SKIP to 803 Don’t know (if drinking or on drugs) 717 1 Drinking 2 On drugs 3 Both (drinking and on drugs) 4 Drinking or on drugs – could not tell which 718 1 All known SKIP to 822 Some known 3 All strangers Ask 814 Don’t know 719 1 Yes SKIP to 832 Not sure (possibly or probably) 3 No – SKIP to 85 720 1 Sight only 2 Casual acquaintance* 3 Well known Yes – SKIP to 84 No – Ask 83 722 1 Yes 2 No 3 Other – Specify SKIP to 85 RELATIVE 723 1 Spouse at time of incident 2 Ex-spouse at time of incident* 3 Parent or step-parent 4 Own child or step-child 5 Brother/sister 6 Other relative – Specify NONRELATIVE 724 7 Boyfriend or girlfriend, ex-boyfriend or ex-girlfriend 8 Friend or ex-friend* 9 Roommate, boarder 10 Schoolmate 725 11 Neighbor 12 Someone at work, customer* 13 Other nonrelative – Specify 726 1 White 2 Black* 3 Other – Specify 4 Don’t know race of any/some 727 1 Mostly White 2 Mostly Black 3 Mostly some other race 4 Equal number of each race 5 Don’t know FORM NCVS-2 (5-1-2000)Page 10 87. Was this the only time any of these offenders committed a crime against you or your household or made threats against you or your household? 730 1 Yes (only time) 2 No (there were other times) 3 Don’t know 88. ASK OR VERIFY – Was something stolen or taken without permission that belonged to you or others in the household? FIELD REPRESENTATIVE –Include anything stolen from an unrecognizable business. Do not include any items stolen from a recognizable business operated in the respondent’s home or in a commercial establishment. 731 1 Yes – SKIP to 96 2 No 3 Don’t know 89. ASK OR VERIFY – Did the offender(s) ATTEMPT to take something that belonged to you or others in the household? . . . 732 1 Yes – Ask 90 2 No SKIP to 110, page 143 Don’t know 90. What did the offender try to take? Anything else? 733 1 Cash Mark (X) all that apply? * 2 Purse 3 Wallet 4 Credit cards, checks, bank cards 5 Car 6 Other motor vehicle 734 7 Part of motor vehicle (tire, hubcap, attached tape deck, attached CB radio, etc.)* 8 Gasoline or oil 9 Bicycle or parts 10 TV, stereo, other household appliances735 11 Silver, china, art objects* 12 Other household furnishings (furniture, rugs, etc.) 736 13 Personal effects (clothing, jewelry, toys, etc.) * 14 Handgun (pistol, revolver) 15 Other firearm (rifle, shotgun) 737 16 Other – Specify * 17 Don’t know 91. Did the (property/money) the offender tried to take belong to you personally, 738 1 Respondent only – SKIP to 92 to someone else in the household, or to 2 Respondent and other household both you and other household member(s) – Fill Check Item J members? 3 Other household member(s) Mark (X) only one box.. . . only – Fill Check Item J 4 Nonhousehold member(s) only 5 Other – Specify SKIP to 92 CHECK ITEM J Besides the respondent, which household member(s) owned the (property/money) the offender tried to take? If not sure, ask. Do not enter the respondent’s line number. 739 Line number* Line number Line number OR 40 Household property 92. ASK OR VERIFY – Was/Were the article(s) IN or ATTACHED to a motor vehicle when the attempt was made to take (it/them)? 740 1 Yes 2 No CHECK ITEM K Did the offender try to take cash, a purse, or a wallet? (Is box 1, 2, or 3 marked in 90?) Yes – Ask 93 No – SKIP to 94 93. ASK OR VERIFY – Was the (cash/purse/wallet) on your person, for instance, in a pocket or being held? 742 1 Yes 2 No FORM NCVS-2 (5-1-2000) Page 11 94. ASK OR VERIFY – Was there anything (else) the offender(s) tried to take directly from you, for instance, from your pocket or hands, or something that you were wearing? Exclude property not belonging to respondent or other household member. 95. Which items did the offender(s) try to take directly from you? Enter code(s) from 90. Do not include cash/purse/wallet. Exclude property not belonging to respondent or other household member. 96. What was taken that belonged to you or others in the household? Anything else? Mark (X) all that apply. FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – If purse or wallet stolen, ASK – Did it contain any money? 745 1 Yes – Ask 95 2 No – SKIP to 110, page 14 746 – SKIP to 110, page 14* Code Code Code OR 40 Tried to take everything marked in 90 directly from respondent – SKIP to 110, page 14 Cash 747 00$ ____________ . Amount of cash taken 1 Only cash taken – Enter amount above * 748 Property PURSE/WALLET/CREDIT CARDS 2 PurseEnter amount of stolen cash where indicated. 3 WalletMark the appropriate box(es) for stolen property or the box for only cash taken. 4 ..Ask: Did it contain money? Credit cards, check, bank cards VEHICLE OR PARTS 749 * 5 6 7 8 9 10 Car Other motor vehicle Part of motor vehicle (tire, hubcap, attached tape deck, attached CB radio, etc.) Unattached motor vehicle accessories or equipment (unattached radio, etc.) Gasoline or oil Bicycle or parts HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS 750 * 11 12 13 TV, VCR, stereo, other household appliances Silver, china, art objects Other household furnishings (furniture, rugs, etc.) PERSONAL EFFECTS 751 * 752 * 14 15 16 17 18 19 Portable electronic and photographic gear (Personal stereo, TV, calculator, camera, etc.) Clothing, furs, luggage, briefcase Jewelry, watch, keys Collection of stamps, coins, etc. Toys, sports and recreation equipment (not listed above) Other personal and portable objects FIREARMS 753 * 20 21 Handgun (pistol, revolver) Other firearm (rifle, shotgun) MISCELLANEOUS 754 * 755 * 22 23 24 25 26 Tools, machines, office equipment Farm or garden produce, plants, fruit, logs Animals – pet or livestock Food or liquor Other – Specify 27 Don’t know Notes FORM NCVS-2 (5-1-2000)Page 12 97. Did the stolen (property/money) belong 760 1 Respondent only – SKIP to Check Item Mto you personally, to someone else in 2 Respondent and other householdthe household, or to both you and other member(s) – Fill Check Item Lhousehold members? 3 Other household member(s) only – Fill Check Item LMark (X) only one box. 4 Nonhousehold member(s) only..Other – Specify SKIP to5 Check Item M CHECK ITEM L CHECK ITEM M Besides the respondent, which household member(s) owned the stolen (property/money)? If not sure, ask. Do not enter the respondent’s line number. Was a car or other motor vehicle taken? (Is box 5 or 6 marked in 96?) 761 Line number* Line number Line number OR 40 Household property Yes – Ask 98 No – SKIP to 100 98. Had permission to use the (car/motor 1 Yes – Ask 99763 vehicle) ever been given to the 2 Nooffender(s)? 3 Don’t know ..SKIP to Check Item N 99. Did the offender return the (car/motor 1 Yes764 vehicle) this time? 100. ASK OR VERIFY – Was/Were the article(s) IN or ATTACHED to a motor vehicle when (they were/it was) taken? ..SKIP to Check Item N 2 No 1 Yes765 2 No CHECK ITEM N Yes – Ask 101Was cash, purse, or a wallet taken? (Is a cash amount entered or box 1, 2, or 3 No – SKIP to 102 marked in 96?) 101. ASK OR VERIFY – Was the (cash/purse/wallet) on your person, for instance, in a pocket or being held? 102. ASK OR VERIFY – Was there anything (else) the offender(s) took directly from you, for instance, from your pocket or hands, or something that you were wearing? Exclude property not belonging to respondent or other household member. 103. Which items did the offender(s) take directly from you? Enter code(s) from 96. Do not include cash/purse/wallet. Exclude property not belonging to respondent or other household member. 104. If only cash/checks/credit cards is marked in item 96, SKIP to 106. What was the value of the PROPERTY that was taken? Include recovered property. (Exclude any stolen cash/ checks/credit cards. If jointly owned with a nonhousehold member(s), include only share owned by household members.) 105. How did you decide the value of the property that was taken? Any other way? Mark (X) all that apply. 106. Was all or part of the stolen (money/ property) recovered, not counting anything received from insurance? 1 Yes 2 767 No 1 Yes – Ask 103 2 768 No – SKIP to 104 769 * Code Code Code OR 40 Everything marked in 96 was taken directly from respondent 00770 $ ____________ . Value of property taken 1 Original cost771 2 Replacement cost* 3 Personal estimate of current value 4 Insurance report estimate 5 Police estimate 6 Don’t know 7 Other – Specify 772 1 All – SKIP to Check Item O 2 Part – Ask 107 3 None – SKIP to 109 FORM NCVS-2 (5-1-2000) Page 13 107. What was recovered? Anything else? Cash775Mark (X) all that apply. 00$ ____________ . Amount of cash recoveredFIELD REPRESENTATIVE – If purse or wallet recovered, ASK – 776 1 Only cash recoveredDid it contain any money? * PropertyEnter amount of recovered cash where indicated. Mark the appropriate box(es) for 2 Purserecovered property or the box for only cash Ask: Did it contain any money?3 Walletrecovered. 4 Credit cards, checks, bank cards 5 Car or other motor vehicle 6 Property other than the above CHECK ITEM O Was PROPERTY other than cash, 1 Yes – Ask 108777checks or credit cards recovered? (If ... 2 No – SKIP to 109not sure, ask.) ..108. Considering any damage, what was the value of the property after it was 778 00recovered? (Do not include recovered $ ____________. Value of property recoveredcash, checks, or credit cards.) 109. Was the theft reported to an insurance company? 1 Yes 2 779 No or don’t have insurance 3 Don’t know 110. (Other than any stolen property) was anything that belonged to you or other 1 Yes – Ask 111780 members of the household damaged in 2 No – SKIP to 115 this incident? PROBE – For example, was (a lock or window broken/clothing damaged/ damage done to a car), or something else? 111. Was/Were the damaged item(s) repaired 1 Yes, all781or replaced? SKIP to 1132 Yes, part 3 No, none – Ask 112 112. How much would it cost to repair or replace the damaged item(s)? 782 00$ ____________ . Cost to repair/replace – SKIP to 114 0 No cost – SKIP to 115 x Don’t know – SKIP to 114 113. How much was the repair or replacement cost? 783 00$ ____________ . Cost to repair/replace – Ask 114 0 No cost – SKIP to 115 x Don’t know – SKIP to 114 114. Who (paid/will pay) for the repairs or 1 Items will not be repaired or replacedreplacement? Anyone else? 784 2 Household memberMark (X) all that apply. * 3 Landlord or landlord’s insurance 4 Victim’s (or household’s) insurance 5 Offender 6 Other – Specify Notes FORM NCVS-2 (5-1-2000)Page 14 CHECK ITEM P 115. Were the police informed or did they find out about this incident in any way? 116. How did the police find out about it? Mark (X) first box that applies. FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – If proxy interview, we want the proxy respondent to answer questions 116–134 for herself/himself, not for the person for whom the proxy interview is being taken. 117. What was the reason it was not reported to the police? (Can you tell me a little more?) Any other reason? Mark (X) all that apply. STRUCTURED PROBE – Was the reason because you dealt with it another way, it wasn’t important enough to you, insurance wouldn’t cover it, police couldn’t do anything, police wouldn’t help, or was there some other reason? Is more than one reason marked in 117? 118. Which of these would you say was the most important reason why the incident was not reported to the police? Enter code from 117. Notes 800 1 Yes – Ask 116 2 No – SKIP to 117 . . . 3 Don’t know – SKIP to 130, page 17 801 1 Respondent – SKIP to 119 2 Other household member . . . 3 Someone official called police (guard, apt. SKIPmanager, school official, etc.) to 121 4 Someone else 5 Police were at scene – SKIP to 123 6 Offender was a police officer 7 Some other way – Specify SKIP to 124 DEALT WITH ANOTHER WAY802 * 1 Reported to another official (guard, apt. manager, school official, etc.) 2 Private or personal matter or took care of it myself or informally; told offender’s parent NOT IMPORTANT ENOUGH TO RESPONDENT 3 Minor or unsuccessful crime, small or no loss, recovered property 4 Child offender(s), "kid stuff" 5 Not clear it was a crime or that harm was intended INSURANCE WOULDN’T COVER 6 No insurance, loss less than deductible, etc. POLICE COULDN’T DO ANYTHING 803 7 Didn’t find out until too late 8 Could not recover or identify property* 9 Could not find or identify offender, lack of proof POLICE WOULDN’T HELP 10 Police wouldn’t think it was important enough, wouldn’t want to be bothered or get involved 804 11 Police would be inefficient, ineffective (they’d arrive late or not at all, wouldn’t do a good job, etc.)* 12 Police would be biased, would harass/insult respondent, cause respondent trouble, etc.) 13 Offender was police officer OTHER REASON 805 14 Did not want to get offender in trouble with the law 15 Was advised not to report to police* 16 Afraid of reprisal by offender or others 806 17 Did not want to or could not take time – too inconvenient* 18 Other – Specify 19 Respondent not present or doesn’t know why it wasn’t reported 1 Yes – Ask 118 2 No – SKIP to 130, page 17 808 Code – SKIP to 130, page 17 30 No one reason more important – SKIP to 130, page 17 FORM NCVS-2 (5-1-2000) Page 15 119. Besides the fact that it was a crime, did TO GET HELP WITH THIS INCIDENTYOU have any other reason for reporting this incident to the police? 1 Stop or prevent THIS incident from happening 2 809 Needed help after incident due to injury, etc.*Any other reason? TO RECOVER LOSSMark (X) all that apply. 3 To recover propertySTRUCTURED PROBE – 4 To collect insurance Did you report it to get help with this incident, to recover your loss, to stop or TO GET OFFENDER punish the offender, to let police know 5 To prevent further crimes against respondent/about it, or was there some other respondent’s household by this offenderreason? 6 To stop this offender from committing other crimes against anyone 810 7 To punish offender 8 Catch or find offender – other reason or no* ... reason given . .. TO LET POLICE KNOW 9 To improve police surveillance of respondent’s home, area, etc. 10 Duty to let police know about crime OTHER 11 Other reason – Specify 12 811 No other reason – SKIP to 121* CHECK ITEM Q Yes – Ask 120Is more than one reason marked No – SKIP to 121in 119? 120. Which of these would you say was the 813most important reason why the incident was reported to the police? Code 21 No one reason more importantEnter code from 119. 22 Because it was a crime was most important 121. Did the police come when they found out 1 Yes – Ask 122814about the incident? 2 No SKIP to 1243 Don’t know 4 Respondent went to police – SKIP to 123 122. How soon after the police found out did 1 Within 5 minutes815they respond? Was it within 5 minutes, 2 Within 10 minuteswithin 10 minutes, an hour, a day, or 3 Within an hourlonger? 4 Within a day Mark (X) first category respondent is sure of. 5 Longer than a day 6 Don’t know how soon 123. What did they do while they were 1 Took report816(there/here)? Anything else? 2 Searched/looked around* 3 Took evidence (fingerprints, inventory, etc.) 4 Mark (X) all that apply. Questioned witnesses or suspects 5 Promised surveillance 6 Promised to investigate 817 7 Made arrest 8 Other – Specify* 9 Don’t know 124. Did you (or anyone in your household) 1 Yes – Ask 125818have any later contact with the police 2 Noabout the incident? SKIP to 1283 Don’t know 125. Did the police get in touch with you or 1 Police contacted respondent or other HHLD member819did you get in touch with them? 2 Respondent (or other HHLD member) contacted police 3 Both 4 Don’t know 5 Other – Specify 126. Was that in person, by phone, or some 1 In person820other way? 2 Not in person (by phone, mail, etc.) 3 Both in person and not in person 4 Don’t know 127. What did the police do in following up 1 Took report821this incident? Anything else? 2 Questioned witnesses or suspects* 3 Did or promised surveillance/investigation 4 Mark (X) all that apply. Recovered property 5 Made arrest 6 Stayed in touch with respondent/household 7 Other – Specify822 * 8 Nothing (to respondent’s knowledge) 9 Don’t know FORM NCVS-2 (5-1-2000)Page 16 128. Did you (or someone in your household) sign a complaint against the offender(s) to the police department or the authorities? 129. ASK OR VERIFY – As far as you know, was anyone arrested or were charges brought against anyone in connection with this incident? 130. Did you (or someone in your household) receive any help or advice from any office 825 1 2 Yes No 826 1 2 3 Yes No Don’t know 827 1 Yes – Ask 131 or agency — other than the police — that 2 No deals with victims of crime? 3 Don’t know 131. Was that a government or private agency? 828 1 2 3 Government Private Don’t know ..SKIP to Check Item R CHECK ITEM R Yes – Ask 132Were the police informed? (Is "Yes" No – SKIP to 135marked in 115 on page 15?) 132. Have you (or someone in your household) 1 Yes – Ask 133829had contact with any other authorities 2about this incident (such as a prosecutor, No..SKIP to 134court, or juvenile officer)? 3 Don’t know 133. Which authorities? Any others? 1 Prosecutor, district attorney830Mark (X) all that apply. 2 Magistrate* 3 Court 4 Juvenile, probation or parole officer 5 Other – Specify 134. 135. 136. 137. Do you expect the police, courts, or other authorities will be doing anything further in connection with this incident? ASK OR VERIFY – What were you doing when this incident (happened/started)? Mark (X) only one box. FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – If proxy interview, replace "you" with the name of the person for whom the proxy interview is being taken in 135–160. ASK OR VERIFY – Did you have a job at the time of the incident? What was your major activity the week 1 Yes –Specify831 2 No 3 Don’t know 1 Working or on duty – SKIP to 138832 2 On the way to or from work – SKIP to 138 3 On the way to or from school 4 On the way to or from other place 5 Shopping, errands 6 Attending school 7 Leisure activity away from home 8 Sleeping 9 Other activities at home 10 Other – Specify 11 Don’t know 1 Yes – SKIP to 138840 2 No 1 Looking for work841of the incident — were you looking for work, keeping house, going to school, or... 2 Keeping house doing something else? 3 Going to school 4 Unable to workMark (X) only one box. SKIP to 151, page 195 Retired 6 Other – Specify Notes FORM NCVS-2 (5-1-2000) Page 17 138. Which of the following best describes your job at the time of the incident? PERSONAL INTERVIEW (Show flashcard) TELEPHONE INTERVIEW – Were you employed in the (Read main headings until you get a yes. Then read answer categories) — Mark only one category. 139. ASK OR VERIFY – Was your job with (Read answer categories) – 140. While working at this job, did you work mostly in (Read answer categories) – 141. ASK OR VERIFY – Did this incident happen at your work site? 142. Did you usually work days or nights? CHECK ITEM S Was the respondent injured in this incident? (Is box 2–11 marked in 31 on page 5?) 143. Did YOU lose time from work because of the injuries you suffered in this incident? 144. How much time did you lose because of injuries? 145. During these days, did you lose any pay that was not covered by unemployment insurance, sick leave, or some other source? 146. About how much pay did you lose? 842 1 2 3 4 Medical Profession – As a – Physician Nurse Technician Other – Specify 5 6 7 Mental Health Services Field – Are your duties – Professional (social worker/psychiatrist) Custodial care Other – Specify 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 Teaching Profession – Were you employed in a – Preschool Elementary Junior high or middle school High school College or university Technical or industrial school Special education facility Other – Specify 16 17 18 19 Law Enforcement or Security Field – Were you employed as a – Law enforcement officer Prison or jail guard Security guard Other – Specify 20 21 22 23 Retail Sales – Were you employed as a – Convenience or liquor store clerk Gas station attendant Bartender Other – Specify Transportation Field – Were you employed as a – 24 25 26 Bus driver Taxi cab driver Other – Specify OR 27 Something else – Specify 843 1 2 3 4 A private company, business, or individual for wages? The Federal government? A State, county, or local government? Yourself (Self-employed) in your own business, professional practice, or farm? 844 1 2 3 4 A city? Suburban area? Rural area? Combination of any of these? 845 1 2 3 4 Yes No Don’t know Other – Specify 846 1 2 3 Days Nights Both days and nights/rotating shifts Yes (injury marked in 31) – Ask 143 No (blank or None marked in 31) – SKIP to 147 1 Yes – Ask 144870 2 No – SKIP to 147 871 0 x Number of days – Ask 145 Less than one day – SKIP to 147 Don’t know – Ask 145 872 1 2 Yes – Ask 146 No – SKIP to 147 873 $ ____________ . x Don’t know 00 Amount of pay lost FORM NCVS-2 (5-1-2000)Page 18 Was the respondent on the way to or from work, school, or some other place when the incident (happened/started)? (Is box 2, 3, or 4 marked in 135 on page 17?) 1 2 Yes – Ask 150 No – SKIP to 151 CHECK ITEM T 153. ASK OR VERIFY – You told me earlier you were on the way (to/from) (work/school/some place) when the incident happened. 881 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Car, truck or van Motorcycle Bicycle On foot School bus (private or public) Bus or trolley Subway or rapid transit Train Taxi Other – Specify 874 Did YOU lose any (other) time from work because of this incident for such things as cooperating with a police investigation, testifying in court, or repairing or replacing damaged or stolen property? 1 2 3 4 5 Police related activities Court related activities Repairing damaged property Replacing stolen items Other – Specify 147. 875 How much time did you lose altogether because of (name all reasons marked in 147)? 0 x 148. 876 149. During these days, did you lose any pay that was not covered by unemployment insurance, paid leave, or some other source? Yes – Ask 153 No – SKIP to Check Item U 877 About how much pay did you lose?150. None (did not lose time from work for any of these reasons) – SKIP to 151 ...Ask 148 Number of days – Ask 149 Less than one day – SKIP to 151 Don’t know – Ask 149 $ ____________ . Don’t knowx 00 Amount of pay lost Were there any (other) household members 16 years or older who lost time from work because of this incident? 151. 1 2 Yes – Ask 152 No – SKIP to Check Item T 878 879 How much time did they lose altogether? 0 x 152. Number of days Less than one day Don’t know Is this incident part of a series of crimes? (Is box 2 (is a "series") marked in Check Item D on page 1?) CHECK ITEM U Yes – Ask 154 No – SKIP to 161, page 21 883 You have told me about the most recent incident. How many times did this kind of thing happen to you during the last 6 months? 1 2 3 154. Number of incidents – Ask 155 Is that because there is no way ofknowing, or because it happened too many times, or is there some other reason? OR Don’t know – No way of knowing Happened too many times Some other reason – Specify 6 * 884 Mark (X) all that apply. If no time was lost for any of these reasons, mark None (box 6). What means of transportation were you using? Mark (X) only one box. 155. In what month or months did these incidents take place? Number of incidents per quarter Jan., Feb., or March (Qtr. 1) April, May, or June (Qtr. 2) July, Aug., or Sept. (Qtr. 3) Oct., Nov., or Dec. (Qtr. 4) 885 886 887 888 If more than one quarter involved, ASK How many in (name months)? FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – Enter number for each quarter as appropriate. Was the respondent on the way to or from work, school, or some other place when the incident (happened/started)? (Is box 2, 3, or 4 marked in 135 on page 17?) 1 2 Yes – Ask 150 No – SKIP to 151 CHECK ITEM T 153. ASK OR VERIFY – You told me earlier you were on the way (to/from) (work/school/some place) when the incident happened. 881 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Car, truck or van Motorcycle Bicycle On foot School bus (private or public) Bus or trolley Subway or rapid transit Train Taxi Other – Specify 874 Did YOU lose any (other) time from work because of this incident for such things as cooperating with a police investigation, testifying in court, or repairing or replacing damaged or stolen property? 1 2 3 4 5 Police related activities Court related activities Repairing damaged property Replacing stolen items Other – Specify 147. 875 How much time did you lose altogether because of (name all reasons marked in 147)? 0 x 148. 876 149. During these days, did you lose any pay that was not covered by unemployment insurance, paid leave, or some other source? Yes – Ask 153 No – SKIP to Check Item U 877 About how much pay did you lose?150. None (did not lose time from work for any of these reasons) – SKIP to 151 ...Ask 148 Number of days – Ask 149 Less than one day – SKIP to 151 Don’t know – Ask 149 $ ____________ . Don’t knowx 00 Amount of pay lost Were there any (other) household members 16 years or older who lost time from work because of this incident? 151. 1 2 Yes – Ask 152 No – SKIP to Check Item T 878 879 How much time did they lose altogether? 0 x 152. Number of days Less than one day Don’t know Is this incident part of a series of crimes? (Is box 2 (is a "series") marked in Check Item D on page 1?) CHECK ITEM U Yes – Ask 154 No – SKIP to 161, page 21 883 You have told me about the most recent incident. How many times did this kind of thing happen to you during the last 6 months? 1 2 3 154. Number of incidents – Ask 155 Is that because there is no way ofknowing, or because it happened too many times, or is there some other reason? OR Don’t know – No way of knowing Happened too many times Some other reason – Specify 6 * 884 Mark (X) all that apply. If no time was lost for any of these reasons, mark None (box 6). What means of transportation were you using? Mark (X) only one box. 155. In what month or months did these incidents take place? Number of incidents per quarter Jan., Feb., or March (Qtr. 1) April, May, or June (Qtr. 2) July, Aug., or Sept. (Qtr. 3) Oct., Nov., or Dec. (Qtr. 4) 885 886 887 888 If more than one quarter involved, ASK How many in (name months)? FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – Enter number for each quarter as appropriate. FORM NCVS-2 (5-1-2000) Page 19 156. 157. 158. Did all, some, or none of these incidents occur in the same place? Mark (X) only one box. Were all, some, or none of these incidents done by the same person(s)? Mark (X) only one box. What (was/were) the offender(s) relationship(s) to you? For example, friend, spouse, schoolmate, etc. Mark (X) all that apply. 889 890 891 * 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 All in the same place Some in the same place None in the same place All by same person Some by same person None by same person Don’t know – SKIP to 159 Relative Spouse at time of incident Ex-spouse at time of incident Parent or step-parent Other relative – Specify 5 6 Nonrelative Friend or ex-friend Neighbor 7 Schoolmate892 8 Roommate, boarder* 9 Stranger 10 Other nonrelative – Specify 159. Did the same thing happen each time? 1 Yes893 2 No – How did the incidents differ? 160. Is the trouble still going on? 894 1 Yes 2 No – What ended it? Mark the ONE category that best Contact crimes describes this series of crimes. CHECK ITEM V1 If more than one category describes this series, mark the box with the lowest number. 895 1 2 Completed or threatened violence in the course of the victim’s job (police officer, security guard, psychiatric social worker, etc.) Completed or threatened violence between spouses, other relatives, friends, neighbors, etc. 3 Completed or threatened violence at school or on school property 4 Other contact crimes (other violence, pocket picking, purse snatching, etc.) – Specify Noncontact crimes 5 Theft or attempted theft of motor vehicles 6 Theft or attempted theft of motor vehicle parts (tire, hubcap, battery, attached tape deck, etc.) 7 Theft or attempted theft of contents of motor vehicle, including unattached parts 8 Theft or attempted theft at school or on school property 9 Illegal entry of, or attempt to enter, victim’s home, other building on property, second home, hotel, motel 10 Theft or attempted theft from victim’s home or vicinity by person(s) known to victim (roommate, babysitter, etc.) 11 Theft or attempted theft from victim’s home or vicinity by person(s) unknown to victim 12 Other theft or attempted theft (at work, while shopping, etc.) – Specify FORM NCVS-2 (5-1-2000)Page 20 161. 161.161.Hate crimes or crimes of prejudice or bigotry occur when (an offender/offenders) target(s) people because of one or more of their characteristics or religious beliefs. Do you have any reason to suspect the 910 1 Yes – Ask 162 incident just discussed was a hate crime or 2 No..SKIP to Check Item V3crime of prejudice or bigotry? 3 Don’t know 162. An offender/Offenders can target people for a variety of reasons, but we are only going to ask you about a few today. Do you suspect the offender(s) targeted you because of... (a) Your race? (b) Your religion? (c) Your ethnic background or national origin (for example, people of Hispanic origin)? (d) Your disability(ies) (by this I mean physical, mental, or developmental disabilities)? (e) Your gender? (f) Your sexual orientation? If "Yes," SAY – (by this we mean homosexual, bisexual, or heterosexual) 163. Some offenders target people because they associate with certain people or the (offender perceives/ offenders perceive) them as having certain characteristics or religious beliefs. Do you suspect you were targeted because of... (a) Your association with people who have certain characteristics or religious beliefs (for example, a multiracial couple)? (b) The offender(s)’s perception of your characteristics or religious beliefs (for example, the offender(s) thought you were Jewish because you went into a synagogue)? 896 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 897 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 898 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 899 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 900 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 901 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 911 1 Yes –Specify 2 No 3 Don’t know 912 913 1 Yes –Specify 2 No 3 Don’t know 914 CHECK ITEM V2 Are one or more boxes marked Yes – Ask 164 "Yes" in 162 OR 163? No – SKIP to Check Item V3 164. Do you have any evidence that this incident was a hate crime or crime of 915 1 Yes – Ask 165 prejudice or bigotry? 2 No... SKIP to Check Item V33 Don’t knowIf "No" or "Don’t know," ASK – Did the offender(s) say something, write anything, or leave anything behind at the crime scene that would suggest you were targeted because of your characteristics or religious beliefs? FORM NCVS-2 (5-1-2000) Page 21 165. The next questions ask about the evidence you have that makes you suspect this incident was a hate crime or a crime of prejudice or bigotry. As I read the following questions, please tell me if any of the following happened: (a) Did the offender(s) make fun of you, make negative comments, use slang, hurtful words, or abusive language? 916 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know (b) Were any hate symbols present at the crime scene to indicate the offender(s) targeted you for a particular reason (for example, a swastika, graffiti on the walls of a temple, a burning cross, or written words)? 917 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know (c) Did a police investigation confirm the offender(s) targeted you (for example, did the offender(s) confess a motive, or did the police find books, journals, or pictures that indicated the offender(s) (was/were) prejudiced against people with certain characteristics or religious beliefs)? 918 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know (d) Do you know the offender(s) (has/have) committed similar hate crimes or crimes of prejudice or bigotry in the past? 919 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know (e) Did the incident occur on or near a holiday, event, location, gathering place, or building commonly associated with a specific group (for example, at the Gay Pride March or at a synagogue, Korean church, or gay bar)? 920 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know (f) Have other hate crimes or crimes of prejudice or bigotry happened to you or in your area/ neighborhood where people have been targeted? 921 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know (g) Do your feelings, instincts, or perception lead you to suspect this incident was a hate crime or crime of prejudice or bigotry, but you do not have enough evidence to know for sure? 922 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 908 1 Yes166. At any time, did you tell the police that you believed the incident was a hate crime or 2 No crime of prejudice or bigotry? CHECK ITEM V3 Is this a Sample J19 household? (Look Yes – Ask 167 at the sample number at the top of the No – SKIP to Check Item W cover page of this incident report.) Notes FORM NCVS-2 (5-1-2000)Page 22 167. The next questions ask about any health conditions, impairments, or disabilities you may have. Due to a health condition, impairment, or disability, are you limited in any of the following major life activities? (Read categories a-g below.) (a) Self-care, such as bathing, dressing, or feeding yourself? (b) Communicating, such as talking with or listening to other people? (c) Learning any new skills or activities? (d) Mobility, such as bending, walking, climbing stairs, or carrying something weighing approximately 10 pounds? (e) Self-direction, such as making important decisions concerning your health care, education, or career? (f) Living independently, such as preparing meals, shopping for groceries and personal items, and doing housework? (g) Managing finances, such as keeping track of your money and paying bills? CHECK ITEM V4 Look at 167. Is box 1 (Yes) marked in any of the categories a–g? 168. What specific health conditions, impairments, or disabilities do you have which limit your ability to (fill with "Yes" responses from 167)? FIELD REPRESENTATIVES – List up to 3 different conditions reported by the respondent. Do not repeat conditions. CHECK ITEM V5 Look at 168. Is only one health condition, impairment, or disability reported? 169. You just reported that (fill with health condition from 168) limits your major life activities. Has this condition lasted longer than six months? 170. Do you consider your (fill with health condition from 168) to be mild, moderate, or severe? CHECK ITEM V6 Is respondent’s age greater than or equal to 22? (Look at control card item 17.) 171. Did your (fill with health condition from 168) begin before age 22? 923 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 924 1 11 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 925 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 926 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 927 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 928 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 929 1 Yes 2 No NoNo 3 Don’t know Yes – Ask 168 No – SKIP to Check Item W 930 0 None – SKIP to Check Item W 931 1 (First health condition) 932 2 (Second health condition) 933 3 (Third health condition) Yes – Ask 169 No – SKIP to 172 934 1 Yes 2 No 935 1 Mild 2 Moderate 3 Severe 4 Don’t know Yes – Ask 171 No – SKIP to 175 936 1 Yes No SKIP to 1752 3 Don’t know ... FORM NCVS-2 (5-1-2000) Page 23 172. You just reported that (fill with health conditions from 168) limits your major life activities. Which of these conditions lasted longer than six months. 173. Do you consider your (fill with FIRST health condition from 168) to be mild, moderate, or severe? FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – Read only if a second health condition is listed in 168. And what about your (fill with SECOND health condition from 168) Do you consider it to be mild, moderate, or severe? FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – Read only if a third health condition is listed in 168. And what about your (fill with THIRD health condition from 168) Do you consider it to be mild, moderate, or severe? 937 0 None 938 1 (First health condition) 939 2 (Second health condition) 940 3 (Third health condition) 941 1 2 3 4 Mild Moderate Severe Don’t know 942 1 2 3 4 Mild Moderate Severe Don’t know 943 1 2 3 4 Mild Moderate Severe Don’t know CHECK ITEM V7 Is respondent’s age greater than or Yes – Ask 174 equal to 22? (Look at control card No – SKIP to 175 item 17.) 174. Which of your health conditions, impairments, or disabilities began before age 22? 175. During the incident you just told me about, 944 0 None 945 1 (First health condition) 946 2 (Second health condition) 947 3 (Third health condition) 948 1 Yes – Fill Check Item V8 do you have any reason to suspect you 2 No were victimized because of your health 3 Don’t knowcondition(s), impairment(s) or disability(ies)? ... SKIP to Check Item W CHECK ITEM V8 Is more than one health condition, Yes – Ask 176 impairment or disability listed in No – SKIP to Check Item W item 168? 176. Which of your health conditions, impairments, or disabilities do you believe caused you to be targeted for this incident? 949 0 None 950 1 (First health condition) 951 2 (Second health condition) 952 3 (Third health condition) FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – Go to Check Item W and complete summary report. FORM NCVS-2 (5-1-2000)Page 24 CHECK ITEM W CHECK ITEM W CHECK ITEM X Summarize this incident or series of incidents. Include what was taken, how entry was gained, how victim was threatened/attacked, what weapons were present and how they were used, any injuries, what victim was doing at time of attack/threat, whether the incident was reported to the police or whether only nonhousehold property was stolen. ALSO INCLUDE DETAILS ABOUT THE INCIDENT THAT ARE NOT PROVIDED IN THE ANSWER CATEGORIES AND THAT WILL HELP CLARIFY THE INCIDENT. FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – Check BOUNDING INFORMATION on the back of the control card. Is there an entry for "Number of persons"? (Refer to 54 on page 7.) Is this the last Incident Report to be filled for this screen question? Is this the last Incident Report to be filled for this respondent? 909 CHECK BOUNDING INFORMATION Yes – Be sure you fill or have filled an Incident Report for each interviewed household member 12 years of age or over who was harmed, threatened with harm, or had something taken from him/her by force or threat in this incident. No Yes – Fill Check Item Z No – Go to next Crime Incident Report Yes – FILL NCVS-1, Check Item H No – Go to next Crime Incident Report CHECK ITEM Y CHECK ITEM Z FORM NCVS-2 (5-1-2000) Page 25 Notes FORM NCVS-2 (5-1-2000)Page 26 OMB No. 1121-0184: Approval Expires 11/30/2001 NOTICE – We are conducting this survey under the authority of Title 13, United States Code, Section 8. Section 9 of this law requires us to keep all information about you and your household strictly confidential. We may use this information only for statistical purposes. Also, Title 42, Section 3732, United States Code, authorizes the Bureau of Justice Statistics, Department of Justice, to collect information using this survey. Title 42, Sections 3789g and 3735, United States Code also requires us to keep all information about you and your household strictly confidential. ASK OF ALL PERSONS 12–18. We estimate that it will take from 5 to 15 minutes to complete this interview with 10 minutes being the average time. If you have any comments regarding these estimates or any other aspect of this survey, send them to the Associate Director for Finance and Administration, Room 2027, U.S. Census Bureau, Washington DC 20233, or to the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Office of Management and Budget, Washington, DC 20503. According to the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, no persons are required to respond to a collection of information unless such collection displays a valid OMB control number. Sample Control number J_____ PSU Segment CK Serial A. FR code B. Respondent Line No. Age 001 002 003 FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – Complete an SCS-1 form for all persons 12-18 in all interviewed households even when that person is a Type Z noninterview. Do NOT complete an SCS-1 form for persons 12-18 if the household is a Type A. C. Type of SCS Interview 1 Personal – Self 2 Telephone – Self SKIP to INTRO 1 3 Personal – Proxy 4 Telephone – Proxy 5 Noninterview – FILL ITEM D FIELD REPRESENTATIVE –Read introduction. FORMSCS-1 U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE (10-31-2000) Economics and Statistics Administration U.S. CENSUS BUREAU ACTING AS COLLECTING AGENT FOR THE BUREAU OF JUSTICE STATISTICS U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE SCHOOL CRIME SUPPLEMENT TO THE NATIONAL CRIME VICTIMIZATION SURVEY 2001 Name D. Reason for SCS noninterview 005 1 Type Z noninterview on NCVS SCS noninterview 2 Refused 3 Not available 4 Physically or mentally unable and no proxy available INTRO 1 – Now I have some additional questions about your school. These answers will be kept confidential, by law. E. SCREEN QUESTIONS FOR SUPPLEMENT 1a. Did you attend school at any time during thelast 6 months, that is, any time since 1st? 1b. During that time, were you ever home-schooled? That is, did you receive ANYof that schooling at home, rather than in a public or private school? 1c. Was ALL or SOME of that home schooling? 2a. During the last 6 months, that is, any timesince ____________________ 1st, if you were in a public or private school, what grade wouldyou be in? 006 1 Yes 2 No – END INTERVIEW 092 1 Yes 2 No –SKIP to 2b 007 1 All –END INTERVIEW 2 Some 093 0 Fifth or under – END INTERVIEW 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Sixth Seventh Eighth Ninth Tenth Eleventh Twelfth Other –Specify 9 College/GED/Post-graduate/ ... SKIP to INTRO 2 Other noneligible – END INTERVIEW 2b. During the last 6 months, that is, any time 008 0 Fifth or under – END INTERVIEWsince ____________________ 1st, what gradewere you in school? 1 Sixth 2 Seventh 3 Eighth 4 Ninth 5 Tenth 6 Eleventh 7 Twelfth 8 Other –Specify 9 College/GED/Post-graduate/ ... SKIP to 3 Other noneligible – END INTERVIEW SCS-1, Page 1 Black ink Page 1, 60% Pantone 182 Pink E. SCREEN QUESTIONS FOR SUPPLEMENT – Continued 009 1 2 3 Pre-K or Kindergarten 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 H.S. Senior 20 All ungraded 30 All Special Education Grades: 020 TO 021 (lowest) (highest) 13 Post-graduate F. ENVIRONMENTAL QUESTIONS City Office Use Only Office Use Only 012 014 015 FIELD REPRESENTATIVE –Probe, if necessary. 013 What is the complete name of your school? In what city, county, and state is your schoollocated? Is your school public or private? Is this your regularly assigned school or a school that you or your family chose? Is your school church-related? Is your school Catholic? Public –ASK 7b Private –SKIP to 7c Yes –ASK 7d No –SKIP to 8 Don’t know –ASK 7d Yes, Catholic No, other religion What grades are taught in your school? FIELD REPRESENTATIVE –Read introduction only if any of the boxes 1– 8 are marked in item 2a. INTRO 2 – The following questions pertain only to your attendance at a public or private school and not to being home-schooled. In what month did your current school year begin? August September Other – Specify Did you attend school for all of the last 6 months? Yes –SKIP to 6a No How many months were you in school duringthe last 6 months? One month Two months Three months Four months Five months 3. 4. 010 011 1 2 5. 1 2 3 4 5 016 017 1 2 1 2 3 018 1 2 3 019 1 2 6a. 6b. 7a. 7b. 7c. 7d. 8. 022How do you get to school most of the time? FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – If multiple modes are used, code the mode in which the student spends the most time. Walk School bus Public bus, subway, train Car Bicycle, motorbike, or motorcycle Some other way –Specify 9. 1 2 3 4 5 6 SKIP to 8 ...Assigned Chosen Assigned school is school of choice State County Office Use Only E. SCREEN QUESTIONS FOR SUPPLEMENT – Continued 009 1 2 3 Pre-K or Kindergarten 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 H.S. Senior 20 All ungraded 30 All Special Education Grades: 020 TO 021 (lowest) (highest) 13 Post-graduate F. ENVIRONMENTAL QUESTIONS City Office Use Only Office Use Only 012 014 015 FIELD REPRESENTATIVE –Probe, if necessary. 013 What is the complete name of your school? In what city, county, and state is your schoollocated? Is your school public or private? Is this your regularly assigned school or a school that you or your family chose? Is your school church-related? Is your school Catholic? Public –ASK 7b Private –SKIP to 7c Yes –ASK 7d No –SKIP to 8 Don’t know –ASK 7d Yes, Catholic No, other religion What grades are taught in your school? FIELD REPRESENTATIVE –Read introduction only if any of the boxes 1– 8 are marked in item 2a. INTRO 2 – The following questions pertain only to your attendance at a public or private school and not to being home-schooled. In what month did your current school year begin? August September Other – Specify Did you attend school for all of the last 6 months? Yes –SKIP to 6a No How many months were you in school duringthe last 6 months? One month Two months Three months Four months Five months 3. 4. 010 011 1 2 5. 1 2 3 4 5 016 017 1 2 1 2 3 018 1 2 3 019 1 2 6a. 6b. 7a. 7b. 7c. 7d. 8. 022How do you get to school most of the time? FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – If multiple modes are used, code the mode in which the student spends the most time. Walk School bus Public bus, subway, train Car Bicycle, motorbike, or motorcycle Some other way –Specify 9. 1 2 3 4 5 6 SKIP to 8 ...Assigned Chosen Assigned school is school of choice State County Office Use Only FORM SCS-1 (10-31-2000)Page 2 SCS-1, Page 2 Black ink Page 2, 60% Pantone 182 Pink F. ENVIRONMENTAL QUESTIONS – Continued F. ENVIRONMENTAL QUESTIONS – Continued 10. How long does it take you to get from yourhome to school most of the time? 11. How do you get home from school most ofthe time? FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – If multiple modes are used, code the mode in which the student spends the most time. If the student volunteers that he or she does not go directly home after school, record the mode that the student uses to get to his or her first destination after school. 12a. Are most students at your school allowed toleave the school grounds to eat lunch? 12b. How often do you leave school grounds at lunch time? (READ CATEGORIES.) 13. During the last 6 months, have youparticipated in any extra-curricular activities sponsored by your school? 14. 15. Does your school take any measures toensure the safety of students? For example, does the school have: a. Security guards and/or assigned policeofficers? b. Other school staff or other adults supervising the hallway? c. Metal detectors? d. Locked entrance or exit doors during theday? e. A requirement that visitors sign in? f. Locker checks? g. A requirement that students wear badges or picture identification? h. One or more security cameras to monitorthe school? i. A code of student conduct, that is, a set of written rules or guidelines that the school provides you? I am going to read a list of statements that could describe a school. Thinking about yourschool over the last 6 months, would you strongly agree, agree, disagree, or stronglydisagree with the following... a. b. c. d. e. Everyone knows what the school rules are The school rules are fair The punishment for breaking school rules is the same no matter who you are The school rules are strictly enforced If a school rule is broken, students know what kind of punishment will follow 16. During the last 6 months, that is, since _______________ 1st, have you attended anydrug education classes in your school? 023 1 Less than 15 minutes 2 15-29 minutes 3 30-44 minutes 4 45-59 minutes 5 60 minutes or longer 024 1 Walk 2 School bus 3 Public bus, subway, train 4 Car 5 Bicycle, motorbike, or motorcycle 6 Some other way – Specify 025 1 2 3 Yes No Don’t know 026 1 2 3 4 5 Never Once or twice a year Once or twice a month Once or twice a week Almost every day 027 1 2 Yes No 028 Yes 1 029 030 1 1 031 032 033 1 1 1 094 1 095 1 096 1 Strongly 034 035 036 037 038 039 Agree 1 1 1 1 1 No 2 DK 3 2 2 3 3 2 2 2 3 3 3 2 3 2 3 2 3 StronglyAgree Disagree Disagree 2 3 4 2 3 4 2 3 4 2 3 4 2 3 4 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know FORM SCS-1 (10-31-2000) Page 3 SCS-1, Page 3 Black ink Page 3, 60% Pantone 182 Pink F. ENVIRONMENTAL QUESTIONS – Continued F. ENVIRONMENTAL QUESTIONS – Continued FIELD REPRESENTATIVE –Read introduction. INTRO 3 – Now I have some more questions about things that happened at school. For this survey, "at school" includes the school building, on school property, on a school bus, or going to and from school. I want to remind you that all of your answers are confidential. 17a. The following question refers to the availability of drugs and alcohol at yourschool. Tell me if you don’t know what any of theseitems are. FIELD REPRESENTATIVE – For each item ask, Is it possible to get _________________________at your school? a. Alcoholic beverages b. Marijuana c. Crack d. Other forms of cocaine e. Uppers such as ecstasy, crystal meth, orother illegal stimulants f. Downers such as GHB or sleeping pills g. LSD or acid h. PCP or angel dust i. Heroin or smack j. Other illegal drugs – If "Yes" is marked, ASK –What drugs? (Exclude tobacco products.) FIELD REPRESENTATIVE –Refer to Drug Slang Cards (SCS-2a and SCS-2b). Reclassify the "other illegal drug(s)" to one of the categories a-i if possible. If able to reclassify the drug(s) mentioned, mark the "No" box in category j, otherwise, mark the "Yes" box in category j and enter the "other illegal drug(s)" mentioned in the Specify space. 17b. FIELD REPRESENTATIVE –For each YES response in 17a ask the drug, otherwise mark NA for each category not marked YES in 17a. Would you say _______________________ (is/are)easy, fairly easy, fairly hard, or hard to get at your school? a. Alcoholic beverages b. Marijuana c. Crack d. Other forms of cocaine e. Uppers such as ecstasy, crystal meth, or other illegal stimulants f. Downers such as GHB or sleeping pills g. LSD or acid h. PCP or angel dust i. Heroin or smack j. Other illegal drugs 17c. During the last 6 months, did you know forsure that any students were on drugs or alcohol while they were at school? 17d. During the last 6 months, did anyone offer, or try to sell or give you an illegal drug otherthan alcohol or tobacco at your school? 040 041 042 043 Yes 1 1 1 1 No 2 2 2 2 DK 3 3 3 3 097 1 2 3 098 045 046 047 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 3 048 1 2 3 DK drug 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 Specify Easy Fairly Easy Fairly Hard Hard NA 049 1 2 3 4 5 050 1 2 3 4 5 051 1 2 3 4 5 052 1 2 3 4 5 099 1 2 3 4 5 100 1 2 3 4 5 054 1 2 3 4 5 055 1 2 3 4 5 056 1 2 3 4 5 057 1 2 3 4 5 101 1 Yes 2 No 102 1 Yes 2 No G. FIGHTING, BULLYING AND HATE BEHAVIORS 18a. During the last 6 months, have you been in one or more physical fights at school? 18b. During the last 6 months, how many timeshave you been in a physical fight at school? 103 1 Yes 2 No –SKIP to 19 104 (Number of times) FORM SCS-1 (10-31-2000)Page 4 SCS-1, Page 4 Black ink Page 4, 60% Pantone 182 Pink G. FIGHTING, BULLYING AND HATE BEHAVIORS – Continued G. FIGHTING, BULLYING AND HATE BEHAVIORS – Continued 19. During the last 6 months, have you beenbullied at school? That is, has anyone picked on you a lot or tried to make you do things you didn’t want to do like give them money?(You may include incidents you reported before.) 20a. 20b. 21a. 21b. During the last 6 months, have you often felt rejected by other students at school? Forexample, have you felt rejected because other students have made fun of you, called younames, or excluded you from activities? During the last 6 months, how often have you been made fun of, called names, or excluded from activities? (READ CATEGORIES.) During the last 6 months, has anyone calledyou a derogatory or bad name at school having to do with your race, religion, ethnicbackground or national origin, disability, gender, or sexual orientation? We call thesehate-related words. Were any of the hate-related words related to ... a. Your race? b. Your religion? c. Your ethnic background or national origin (for example people of Hispanic origin)? d. Any disability (by this I mean physical, mental, or developmental disabilities) youmay have? e. Your gender? f. Your sexual orientation? If "Yes," SAY –(by this I mean homosexual, bisexual, or heterosexual) 22. During the last 6 months, have you seen any 066 1 hate-related words or symbols written in2school classrooms, school bathrooms, school Yes No hallways, or on the outside of your schoolbuilding? H. AVOIDANCE 23a. 23b. During the last 6 months, that is, since ____________________ 1st, did you STAY AWAY from any of the following places because you thought someone might attack or threaten to attack you there? (READ CATEGORIES.) a. The shortest route to school? b. The entrance into the school? c. Any hallways or stairs in school? d. Parts of the school cafeteria? e. Any school restrooms? f. Other places inside the school building? g. School parking lot? h. Other places on school grounds? Did you AVOID any extra-curricular activities at your school because you thought someone might attack or threaten to attack you? 067 105 106 065 107 108 109 110 111 112 068 069 070 071 072 073 074 075 076 1 Yes 2 No 1 Yes 2 No–SKIP to 21a 1 Once or twice in the last 6 months 2 Once or twice a month 3 Once or twice a week, or 4 Almost every day 1 Yes 2 No–SKIP to 22 Yes 1 1 No 2 2 DK 3 3 1 2 3 1 1 1 2 2 2 3 3 3 Yes No 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 Yes 2 No FORM SCS-1 (10-31-2000) Page 5 SCS-1, Page 5 Black ink Page 5, 60% Pantone 182 Pink I. WEAPONS H. AVOIDANCE - Continued I. WEAPONS H. AVOIDANCE - Continued 23c. Did you AVOID any classes becuase you thought someone might attack or threaten toattack you? 23d. Did you stay home from school because youthought someone might attack or threaten to attack you at school, or going to or fromschool? 24. How often are you afraid that someone will attack or threaten to attack you at school? (READ CATEGORIES.) 25. How often are you afraid that someone will attack or threaten to attack you on the way toand from school? (READ CATEGORIES.) 26. Besides the times you are at school, or goingto or from school, how often are you afraid that someone will attack or threaten to attack you? (READ CATEGORIES.) 27a. Some people bring guns, knives or objectsthat can be used as weapons to school for protection. During the last 6 months, that is,since __________________ 1st, did you ever bring a gun to school or onto school grounds? 27b. During the last 6 months, did you ever bring aknife to school or onto school grounds? Include only knives brought as weapons. 27c. During the last 6 months, did you ever bringsome other weapon to school or onto school grounds? 28a. Do you know any (other) students who have brought a gun to your school in the last 6months? 28b. Have you actually seen another student with agun at school in the last 6 months? 29. During the last 6 months, could you have gotten a loaded gun without adultsupervision, either at school or away from school? J. GANGS FIELD REPRESENTATIVE –Read introduction. INTRO 4 – We’d like to know about gangs at your school. You may know these as street gangs, fighting gangs, crews, or something else. Gangs may use common names, signs, symbols, or colors. For this survey, we are interested in all gangs, whether or not they are involved in violent or illegal activity. 30. Are there any gangs at your school? 31. During the last 6 months, that is, since ____________________ 1st, how often have gangsbeen involved in fights, attacks, or other violence at your school? (READ CATEGORIES 1–5.) 32. Have gangs been involved in the sale of drugsat your school in the last 6 months? 077 1 Yes 2 No 078 1 Yes 2 No 079 1 Never 2 Almost never 3 Sometimes 4 Most of the time 080 1 Never 2 Almost never 3 Sometimes 4 Most of the time 1 Never081 2 Almost never 3 Sometimes 4 Most of the time 082 1 Yes 2 No 083 1 Yes 2 No 084 1 Yes 2 No 085 1 Yes 2 No 086 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 113 1 Yes 2 No 058 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know 089 1 Never 2 Once or twice in the last 6 months 3 Once or twice a month 4 Once or twice a week, or 5 Almost everyday 6 Don’t know 090 1 Yes 2 No 3 Don’t know FORM SCS-1 (10-31-2000)Page 6 SCS-1, Page 6 Black ink Page 6, 60% Pantone 182 Pink K. STUDENT CHARACTERISTICS 33a. During the last 4 weeks, did you skip anyclasses? 33b. During the last 4 weeks, on how many daysdid you skip at least one class? 34. During this school year, across all subjects have you gotten mostly (READ CATEGORIES 1-5.) 35. Thinking about the future, do you think you will.... a. Attend school after high school? b. Graduate from a 4-year college? CHECK ITEM A Were the supplement questions asked in private, or was an adult member of the household or family present during at least part of the questions? If not sure or if a telephone interview, ask – Was an adult member of the household or family present during at least part of thesequestions? CHECK ITEM B Is this the last household member to be interviewed? •••
consistently does not listen to adults not sensitive to the feelings of others using drugsrisk taking