making threatsVandalismGang activities***Chapter 4 -- Risk Factors for Youth Violence, Making threatsResearch has documented the magnitude of youth violence and the trends in that violence overtime. But what do we know about why young people become involved in violence? Why dosome youths get caught up in violence while others do not? There is no simple answer to thesequestions, but scientists have identified a number of things that put children and adolescents atrisk of violent behavior and some things that seem to protect them from the effects of risk.Introduction to Risk and Protective FactorsThe concepts of risk and protection are integral to public health. A risk factor is anything thatincreases the probability that a person will suffer harm. A protective factor is something thatdecreases the potential harmful effect of a risk factor. In the context of this report, risk factorsincrease the probability that a young person will become violent, while protective factors bufferthe young person against those risks. The public health approach to youth violence involvesidentifying risk and protective factors, determining how they work, making the public aware ofthese findings, and designing programs to prevent or stop the violence.Risk factors for violence are not static. Their predictive value changes depending on when theyoccur in a young person's development, in what social context, and under what circumstances.Risk factors may be found in the individual, the environment, or the individual's ability torespond to the demands or requirements of the environment. Some factors come into play duringchildhood or even earlier, whereas others do not appear until adolescence. Some involve thefamily, others the neighborhood, the school, or the peer group. Some become less important as aperson matures, while others persist throughout the life span. To complicate the picture evenfurther, some factors may constitute risks during one stage of development but not another.Finally, the factors that predict the onset of violence are not necessarily the same as those thatpredict the continuation or cessation of violence.Violence prevention and intervention efforts hinge on identifying risk and protective factors anddetermining when in the course of development they emerge. To be effective, such efforts mustbe appropriate to a youth's stage of development. A program that is effective in childhood maybe ineffective in adolescence and vice versa. Moreover, the risk and protective factors targetedby violence prevention programs may be different from those targeted by intervention programs,which are designed to prevent the reoccurrence of violence.This report groups risk and protective factors into five domains: individual, family, peer group,school, and community, which includes both the neighborhood and the larger society (Box 4-1).Factors do not always fit neatly into these areas, however. Broken homes are classified as afamily risk factor, but the presence of many such families in a community can contribute tosocial disorganization, an important community-level risk factor (Bursik & Grasmick, 1993;Elliott et al., 1996; Sampson & Lauritsen, 1994).
          Table          Box 4-1. Early and late risk factors for violence at age 15 to 18 and proposed          protective factors, by domain.Risk FactorsRisk factors are not necessarily causes. Researchers identify risk factors for youth violence bytracking the development of children and adolescents over the first two decades of life andmeasuring how frequently particular personal characteristics and social conditions at a given ageare linked to violence at later stages of the life course. Evidence for these characteristics andsocial conditions must go beyond simple empirical relationships, however. To be considered riskfactors, they must have both a theoretical rationale and a demonstrated ability to predict violence-- essential conditions for a causal relationship (Earls, 1994; Kraemer et al., 1997; Thornberry,1998). The reason risk factors are not considered causes is that, in most cases, scientists lackexperimental evidence that changing a risk factor produces changes in the onset or rate ofviolence.As used in this report, risk factors are personal characteristics or environmental conditions thatpredict the onset, continuity, or escalation of violence.The question of causality has practical implications for prevention efforts. Prevention dependslargely on risk factors being true causes of violence. In practical terms, research has amassedenough strong, consistent evidence for the risk factors discussed in this report to provide a basisfor prevention programs, even though a strict cause-and-effect relationship has been establishedfor relatively few of them.Most of the risk factors identified do not appear to have a strong biological basis. Instead, it istheorized, they result from social learning or the combination of social learning and biologicalprocesses. This means that violent youths who have violent parents are far more likely to havemodeled their behavior on their parents' behavior -- to have learned violent behavior from them -- than simply to have inherited it from them. Likewise, society's differing expectations of boysand girls -- expecting boys to be more aggressive, for example -- can result in learned behaviorsthat increase or decrease the risk of violence.The bulk of the research that has been done on risk factors identifies and measures theirpredictive value separately, without taking into account the influence of other risk factors. Moreimportant than any individual factor, however, is the accumulation of risk factors. Risk factorsusually exist in clusters, not in isolation. Children who are abused or neglected, for example,tend to be in poor families with single parents living in disadvantaged neighborhoods beset withviolence, drug use, and crime. Studies of multiple risk factors have found that they haveindependent, additive effects -- that is, the more risk factors a child is exposed to, the greater thelikelihood that he or she will become violent. One study, for example, has found that a 10-year-old exposed to 6 or more risk factors is 10 times as likely to be violent by age 18 as a 10-year-oldexposed to only one factor (Herrenkohl et al., 2000).Researchers have theorized that risk factors also interact with each other, but to date they havefound little evidence of interaction. What evidence does exist suggests that interactions betweenor among factors produce only small effects, but work in this area is continuing. To date, muchmore research has been done on risk factors than protective factors, but that picture, too, is
changing.Developmental Progression to ViolenceScientific theory and research take two different approaches to how youth violence develops --one that focuses on the onset of violent behavior and its frequency, patterns, and continuity overthe life course and one that focuses on the emergence of risk factors at different stages of the lifecourse. Chapter 3 describes two developmental trajectories for the onset of violent behavior --one in which violence begins in childhood (before puberty) and continues into adolescence, andone in which violence begins in adolescence.In contrast, this chapter considers the timing of risk factors. It identifies the individualcharacteristics, experiences, and environmental conditions in childhood or adolescence thatpredict involvement in violent behavior in late adolescence -- that is, age 15 to 18, the peak yearsof offending. Research shows that different risk factors may emerge in these two developmentalperiods and that the same risk factors may have different effect sizes, or predictive power, inthese periods.The timing of risk factors and the onset of violence are connected. Only risk factors that emergein early childhood can logically account for violence that begins before puberty. However, theseearly risk factors may or may not be implicated in violence that begins in adolescence. In fact,studies show that many youths with late-onset violence did not encounter the childhood riskfactors responsible for early-onset violence. For these youths, risk factors for violence emergedin adolescence (Huizinga et al., 1995; Moffitt et al., 1996; Patterson & Yoerger, 1997; Simons etal., 1994).Table 4-1 lists early and late risk factors and estimates their effect sizes for violence at age 15 to18. It does not distinguish between youths who became violent before puberty and those whofirst became violent in adolescence; both groups are included among youths who were violent inlate adolescence. However, the table does indicate that different risk factors emerge beforepuberty (age 6 to 11) and after puberty (age 12 to 14) and that the same risk factors have differenteffect sizes in these periods. Thus, for example, the table shows that substance use in childhoodhas a greater effect on violence at age 15 to 18 than parental abuse or neglect does and thatsubstance use in childhood has a greater effect on violence than substance use in earlyadolescence. (The table is discussed at greater length below, in A Note on Sources.)          Table          Table 4-1. Effect sizes of early and late risk factors for          violence* at age 15 to 18.The distinction between early and late risk factors is important. To be effective, preventionprograms must address the risk factors that appear at a particular stage of development. Theobserved clustering of risk factors in childhood and in adolescence provides clear targets forintervention during these stages of the life course.Limitations of Risk FactorsRisk factors are powerful tools for identifying and locating populations and individuals with a
high potential for becoming violent, and they provide valuable targets for programs aimed atpreventing or reducing violence. But there are important limitations to our knowledge about anduse of risk factors.The following cautions are worth bearing in mind:No single risk factor or set of risk factors is powerful enough to predict with certaintythat youths will become violent. Poor performance in school is a risk factor, forexample, but by no means will all young people who perform poorly in school becomeviolent. Similarly, many youths are exposed to multiple risks yet avoid becominginvolved in violence (Garmezy, 1985; Rutter, 1985; Werner & Smith, 1982, 1992).Because public health research is based on observations and statistical probabilities inlarge populations, risk factors can be used to predict violence in groups with particularcharacteristics or environmental conditions but not in individuals.Given these two limitations, assessments designed to target individual youths forintervention programs must be used with great care. Most individual youths identifiedby existing risk factors for violence, even youths facing accumulated risks, neverbecome violent (Farrington, 1997; Huizinga et al., 1995; Lipsey & Derzon, 1998).Some risk factors are not amenable to change and therefore are not good targets forintervention (Earls, 1994; Hawkins et al., 1998a). Being born male is an example.Of the risk factors that are amenable to change, some are not realistic targets ofpreventive efforts. Eliminating poverty is not a realistic short-term goal, for example,but programs that counter some of the effects of poverty are. (Eliminating or reducingpoverty should be a high-priority long-term goal, however.)Some situations and conditions that influence the likelihood of violence or the form ittakes may not be identified by longitudinal studies as risk factors (predictors) forviolence. Situational factors such as bullying, taunting, and demeaning interactions canserve as catalysts for unplanned violence. The social context can influence theseriousness or form of violence -- for example, the presence of a gun or a gatheringcrowd of peers that makes a youth feel he (or she) needs to protect his (or her)reputation. These may not be primary causes of violence, yet they are contributingfactors and are important to understanding how a violent exchange unfolds. Suchinfluences, although important, may not be identified in this report because of the wayrisk factors are defined.Many studies of risk factors, particularly earlier ones, drew their samples from whiteboys and young men. The limited focus of these studies calls into question theirpredictive power for girls and women and for other racial or ethnic groups. Differencesamong cultures and their socialization and expectations of girls and boys may modifythe influences of some risk factors in these groups.Nonetheless, most of the risk factors identified in this report do apply broadly to all youngpeople. All children go through the same basic stages of human development -- and preventionof youth violence is based on understanding when and how risk factors come into play at variousstages of development. Moreover, there is some evidence that most risk factors are equally valid
predictors of delinquency and violence regardless of sex, race, or ethnicity (Rosay et al., 2000;Williams et al., 1999). Sophisticated studies that identify how cultural differences affect theinterplay of the individual and his or her surroundings will make possible more effectiveprevention efforts.Protective FactorsThere is some disagreement about exactly what protective factors are. They have been viewedboth as the absence of risk and as something conceptually distinct from risk (Guerra, 1998;Jessor et al., 1995; Reiss & Roth, 1993; Wasserman & Miller, 1998). The former view typicallyplaces risk and protective factors on the opposite ends of a continuum. For example, goodparent-child relations might be considered a protective factor because it is the opposite of poorparent-child relations, a known risk factor. But a simple linear relationship of this sort (where therisk of violence decreases as parent-child relations improve) blurs the distinction between riskand protection, making them essentially the same thing.1The view that protection is conceptually distinct from risk (the view used in this report) definesprotective factors as characteristics or conditions that interact with risk factors to reduce theirinfluence on violent behavior (Garmezy, 1985; Rutter, 1985; Stattin & Magnusson, 1996). Forexample, low family socioeconomic status is a risk factor for violence, and a warm, supportiverelationship with a parent may be a protective factor. The warm relationship does not improvethe child's economic status, but it does buffer the child from some of the adverse effects ofpoverty. Protective factors may or may not have a direct effect on violence (compare Jessor et al.,1995 and Stattin & Magnusson, 1996).Interest in protective factors emerged from research in the field of developmentalpsychopathology. Investigators observed that children with exposure to multiple risk factorsoften escaped their impact. This led to a search for the characteristics or conditions that mightconfer resilience -- that is, factors that moderate or buffer the effects of risk (Davis, 1999;Garmezy, 1985; Rutter, 1987; Werner, 1989). Protective factors offer an explanation for whychildren and adolescents who face the same degree of risk may be affected differently.The concept of protective factors is familiar in public health. Wearing seat belts, for example,reduces the risk of serious injury or death in a car crash. Identifying and measuring the effects ofprotective factors is a new area of violence research, and information about these factors islimited. Because they buffer the effect of risk factors, protective factors are an important tool inviolence prevention.Like risk factors, proposed protective factors are grouped into individual, family, school, peergroup, and community categories. They may differ at various stages of development, they mayinteract, and they may exert cumulative effects (Catalano et al., 1998; Furstenberg et al., 1999;Garmezy, 1985; Jessor et al., 1995; Rutter, 1979; Sameroff et al., 1993; Thornberry et al., 1995).Just as risk factors do not necessarily cause an individual child or young person to becomeviolent, protective factors do not guarantee that an individual child or young person will notbecome violent. They reduce the probability that groups of young people facing a risk factor orfactors will become involved in violence.A Note on Sources
This chapter draws heavily on four important studies: Lipsey & Derzon's meta-analysis of 34longitudinal studies on risk factors for violence (1998); Hawkins et al.'s study of malleable riskand protective factors drawn from 30 longitudinal studies, including some not included in theLipsey & Derzon meta-analysis (Hawkins et al., 1998c); Paik and Comstock's meta-analysis of217 studies of exposure to media violence and its effects on aggression and violence (1994); andthe National Institute of Mental Health's Taking Stock report (Hann & Borek, in press), anextensive review of research on risk factors for aggression and other behavior problems.Table 4-1 is adapted from the tables presented in the Lipsey and Derzon and Hawkins et al. meta-analyses. The risk factors in Table 4-1 predict felonies -- that is, violent and property crimes -- atages 15 to 18, the peak years of involvement. Entries in bold are effect sizes from the meta-2analyses by Lipsey and Derzon, Hawkins et al., and Paik and Comstock for various classes ofrisk factors; other entries are effect sizes reported in two or more longitudinal studies. (Riskclasses are described in Appendix 4-A and later sections of this chapter.) Some of the risk classesin Table 4-1 include several separate risk factors. For example, psychological condition includeshyperactivity, daring, and attention problems.Additional risk factors and classes of risk factors have been added from other sources. Forexample, there is adequate evidence to establish harsh, lax, or inconsistent discipline as aseparate risk factor, although Lipsey and Derzon include it in the poor parent-child relationsclass. Academic failure, family conflict, and belonging to a gang are additional examples of riskfactors not included in any of the meta-analyses.The measure of effect size used in these tables is a bivariate correlation (r), or simple correlationbetween two variables. All estimates of effect size are statistically significant and are based onmultiple studies, with those for risk classes typically involving more studies than those forseparate risk factors. The studies reviewed in Lipsey and Derzon, Paik and Comstock, andHawkins et al. are not cited here; however, other studies that were used to establish a risk factoror that are included in estimates of effect size are cited.3There is a rich and extensive body of research on risks for antisocial behavior, externalizingbehavior, conduct disorder, and aggression (Hann & Borek, in press). Each of these terms definesa pattern or set of behaviors that includes aggressive or violent behavior, but most of thebehaviors included are either nonphysical, nonviolent acts or relatively minor forms of physicalaggression. Risk factors for antisocial behavior may be quite different from those that predictviolent behavior (robbery, aggravated assault, rape, and homicide). Since antisocial behaviordoes not present the potential for serious injury or death that violence does, this report relies onstudies that identify risk factors for serious offenses generally and violent behavior specifically,bearing in mind that the vast majority of serious offenders report having been involved in violentoffenses.SummaryRisk and protective factors can be found in every area of a child or adolescent's life, they exertdifferent effects at different stages of development, and they gain strength in numbers. Thepublic health approach to the problem of youth violence seeks to identify risk and protectivefactors, determine when in the life course they typically occur and how they operate, and enableresearchers to design preventive programs to be put in place at just the right time to be most
effective.This chapter describes what is known about individual, family, school, peer group, andcommunity risk and protective factors that exert their effects in childhood and adolescence. Itdescribes the power of early risk factors, which come into play before puberty, and late riskfactors, which exert their influence after puberty, to predict the likelihood of youth violence.Risk Factors in Childhoodloss of appetitesudden changes in weightexcessive worry about weight gainsudden changes in sleep habitsvisible prolonged sadnesssubstance use or abuseThe first decade of life encompasses a vast period of human development. Infants formattachments to parents or other loving adults and begin to become aware of themselves asseparate beings. As toddlers, they begin to talk, to assert themselves, to explore the world aroundthem, and to extend their emotional and social bonds to people other than their parents.The start of school is a milestone in children's continuing social and intellectual development.Other children become more important in their lives, though still not as important as familymembers. They begin to empathize with others and hone their sense of right and wrong. As theyprogress through elementary school, children gain valuable reasoning and problem-solving skillsas well as social skills.Exposure to or involvement in violence can disrupt normal development of both children andadolescents, with profound effects on their mental, physical, and emotional health. In addition,4exposure to violence affects children and adolescents differently at different stages ofdevelopment (Marans & Adelman, 1997).Young children exposed to violence may have nightmares or be afraid to go to sleep, fear beingleft alone, or regress to earlier behavior, such as baby talk or bed-wetting. They may exhibitexcessive irritability or excitability. Violence in the family, especially, may inhibit youngchildren's ability to form trusting relationships and develop independence.Elementary school children who live in violent neighborhoods may also experience sleepdisturbances and be less likely to explore their environment. In addition, they can becomefrightened, anxious, depressed, and aggressive. They may have trouble concentrating in school.Because they understand that violence is intentional, they may worry about what they could havedone to prevent or stop it (Osofsky, 1999).Violence also affects parents. Adults living in violent households or neighborhoods may not beable to keep their children safe or to protect them from harmful influences. Some parents livingin unsafe neighborhoods do not let their children play outside. While this solution may safeguardchildren temporarily, it can also impede healthy development. Parents in these situationsunderstandably feel helpless and hopeless. Those who have been traumatized by violencethemselves may, like their children, become anxious, withdrawn, or depressed. Under suchcircumstances, parents cannot respond spontaneously and joyously to their children, making itdifficult for children to develop strong, secure attachments to their parents. Forming a bond witha loving, responsive parent or other adult caregiver is an essential factor in healthy development(Furstenberg et al., 1999; Osofsky, 1999; Patterson & Yoerger, 1997). Children and familiesexposed to or involved in violence may want to seek professional advice in addressing theirmental, physical, and emotional health concerns.Risk Factors by Domain
A few risk factors for youth violence occur before birth. Others come into play as the childdevelops in response to his or her family and surroundings. Thus, most of the risk factors thatexert an effect before puberty are found in the individual and family domains rather than in thelarger world, a situation that changes dramatically in adolescence. Childhood risk factors arelisted by domain in Box 4-1; effect sizes are listed in Table 4-1.IndividualThe most powerful early risk factors for violence at age 15 to 18 are involvement in generaloffenses and substance use before age 12. General offenses include serious, but not necessarilyviolent acts, such as burglary, grand theft, extortion, and conviction for a felony. Childrenengaging in such crimes often come to the attention of the police and juvenile justice system.Numerous studies have documented the overlap between serious nonviolent and violent offensesin adolescence, so early involvement in serious offenses carries a substantial risk for violencelater.Experimentation with drugs, alcohol, tobacco, or some combination of these substances is notparticularly unusual by age 18, but use of these substances by children under the age of 12 is.Not only are these substances harmful to health, they are illegal. Thus, use of these substancessignals antisocial attitudes and early involvement in a delinquent lifestyle that often comes toinclude violent behavior in adolescence (Fagan, 1993).Two moderate risk factors emerge in childhood, being male and aggression. Boys (and youngmen) are far more likely than girls to be violent (see Chapter 2), yet some researchers havesuggested that sex is a risk marker rather than a risk factor (Earls, 1994; Hawkins et al., 1998a;Kraemer et al., 1997). A risk marker is a characteristic or condition that is associated with knownrisk factors but exerts no causal influence of its own (Earls, 1994; Patterson & Yoerger, 1997).5For example, many more boys than girls are hyperactive, a risk factor with a small effect size, sosome of the predictive power of being male may actually be the influence of hyperactivity.Moreover, boys have traditionally been exposed to more violence than girls, and sociallyapproved male role models are more aggressive, suggesting that social learning plays a role inthis risk factor. However, research indicates that being male confers risk even after accountingfor other known risk factors. This suggests that being male is a risk factor rather than a riskmarker, perhaps with some biological or biological-environmental interaction as the causalmechanism.Many studies have found aggression -- characterized as aggressive and disruptive behavior,verbal aggression, and aggression toward objects -- to be a moderate risk factor among boys,although there is some evidence that physical aggressiveness is actually responsible for most ofthe observed effect (Nagin & Tremblay, 1999). Additional research is needed to sort out theunique influence of each of these types of aggression.The remaining individual risk factors have relatively small effect sizes. Various psychologicalconditions, such as hyperactivity, impulsiveness, daring, and short attention span, pose a smallrisk for violence. A consistent individual predictor is hyperactivity/low attention, the centralcomponents of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), a cognitive disorder that may begenetically influenced in some way (Hawkins et al., 1998a). ADHD is characterized byrestlessness, excessive activity, and difficulty paying attention, traits that may also contribute to
low academic performance, a risk factor in school. Hyperactivity is often found in combinationwith physical aggression, another risk factor. Some researchers question the independent effectof hyperactivity on later violence, suggesting that the effect is actually physical aggression (andperhaps low academic performance) that was not controlled for in earlier studies of hyperactivity(Nagin & Tremblay, 1999). There is little agreement about the mechanism linking hyperactivityto violence.The effects of children's exposure to television and film violence have been studied extensivelyin regard to aggression, but there is relatively little research regarding the effects on more seriousforms of violent behavior (for an extended discussion, see Appendix 4-B). Experimental studieshave found that exposure to media violence has a small average effect size (.13) on serious formsof violence (Paik & Comstock, 1994); the average effect size in cross-sectional survey studieswas very small (.06). Two frequently cited longitudinal studies have examined the effects thatexposure to television violence in childhood produces on violent behavior during adolescence orearly adulthood. One, in which participants reported having punched, beaten, or choked someoneas young adults, found a significant predictive effect for women (.22) but no significant effect formen (Huesmann et al., (submitted)). The other study, in which teenage males reported beinginvolved in a knife fight, car theft, mugging, gang fight, or similar delinquent behavior, found astatistically significant predictive effect in only one of nine tests (Milavsky et al., 1982).Exposure to violence appears to have a weak predictive effect on relatively immediate violencein experimental studies, but there is little consistent evidence to date for a long-term predictiveeffect.Little research has been done on violence in other media -- video games, music videos, and theInternet. A recent meta-analysis by Anderson and Bushman (in press) reports that video gameviolence has a small average effect size (.19) on physical aggression in experimental and cross-sectional studies. Theoretically, the influence of these interactive media might well be greaterthan that of television and films, which present a passive form of exposure, but there are nostudies to date of the effects of exposure to these types of media violence and violent behavior.Problem behavior, another risk factor with a small effect size, refers to relatively minor problembehaviors such as stealing, truancy, disobedience, and temper tantrums. While not serious inthemselves, antisocial behaviors may set the stage for more serious nonviolent or violentbehavior later.The medical or physical risk factor includes a number of conditions that as a group are somewhatpredictive of violence. Prenatal and early postnatal complications, a more specific set of medicalconditions, have been found to have inconsistent effects across a number of studies (Hawkins etal., 1998c). These complications encompass a broad group of genetic conditions or physicalinjuries to the brain and nervous system that interfere with normal development, including lowbirth weight, oxygen deprivation, and exposure to toxins such as lead, alcohol, or drugs(Hawkins et al., 1998b). Low resting heart rate, a condition that has been studied primarily inboys, is associated with fearlessness or stimulation seeking, both characteristics that maypredispose them to aggression and violence (Raine et al., 1997; Hawkins et al., 1998c), but thereis not enough evidence to establish this condition as a risk factor for violence. Some studies haveeven questioned its effects on aggression (Van Hulle et al., 2000; Wadsworth, 1976; Kindlon etal., 1995). There is also no evidence that internalizing disorders -- nervousness and withdrawal,anxiety, and worrying -- are related to later violence (Hawkins et al., 1998c).
Low IQ, or low intelligence, includes learning problems and poor language ability. This riskfactor has a small effect size and is often accompanied by other risk factors with small effectsizes, such as hyperactivity/low attention and poor performance in school.Antisocial beliefs and attitudes, including dishonesty, rule-breaking, hostility to police, and agenerally favorable attitude toward violence, usually constitute a risk factor in adolescence, notchildhood (Hawkins et al., 1998c). Only dishonesty in childhood is predictive of later violence ordelinquency, and its effect is small.FamilyThere are no known strong risk factors for youth violence in the family domain, but lowsocioeconomic status/poverty and having antisocial parents are moderate factors. Socioeconomicstatus generally refers to parents' education and occupation as well as their income. Poorlyeducated parents may be unable to help their children with schoolwork, for example, andchildren living in poor neighborhoods generally have less access to recreational and culturalopportunities. In addition, many poor families live in violent neighborhoods, and exposure toviolence can adversely affect both parents and children, as described above. Limited social andeconomic resources contribute to parental stress, child abuse and neglect, damaged parent-childrelations, and family breakup -- all risk factors with small effects in childhood.Studies suggest that antisocial parents -- that is, violent, criminal parents -- represent anenvironmental rather than a genetic risk factor (Moffitt, 1987). In other words, children learnviolent behavior by observing their parents rather than by inheriting a propensity for violence. Infact, attachment to parents, a possible protective factor, can have the opposite effect if the parentsare violent (Hawkins et al., 1998c).Among the early risk factors with small effect sizes on youth violence is poor parent-childrelations. One specific risk factor in this class -- harsh, lax, or inconsistent discipline -- is alsosomewhat predictive of later violence (Hawkins et al., 1998c). Children need reasonable,consistent discipline to establish the boundaries of acceptable and unacceptable behavior.Children who are treated harshly may view rough treatment as acceptable, those who are givenno guidance may engage in whatever behavior gets them what they want, and children whoreceive mixed signals are completely at sea regarding appropriate behavior. Other familyconditions, such as high stress, large size, and marital discord, also exert a small effect on laterviolence.Another childhood predictor with a small effect size is broken homes, a category that includesdivorced, separated, or never-married parents and a child's separation from parents before age 16.Separation from parents also operates as a distinct risk factor, again with a small effect size.Abusive parenting in general and neglect in particular are predictors of later violence, but theyhave very small effect sizes. Neglect operates as a distinct risk factor, possibly because neglectedchildren are less likely to be supervised or taught appropriate behavior. This is not to imply thatchild abuse and neglect do not cause serious problems in adolescence: Indeed, they have largeeffects on mental health problems, substance abuse, and poor school performance (Belsky &Vondra, 1987; Cicchetti & Toth, 1995; Dembo et al., 1992; Esbensen & Huizinga, 1991;Silverman, et al., 1996; Smith & Thornberry, 1995). This finding is discussed in more detailbelow, in the section on unexpected findings and effects.
SchoolThe only early risk factor in the school domain is poor attitude toward and performance inschool, and its effects are small. Numerous individual and family factors may contribute to poorperformance, making it a fairly broad measure. For example, a child who is physically aggressiveand is rejected by peers or who has difficulty concentrating or sitting still in class mayunderstandably have difficulty performing academic tasks. Children who have been exposed toviolence, as noted earlier, may also have trouble concentrating in school.Peer GroupYoung children do not socialize extensively with other children and are not strongly influencedby peers. Peers become more important as children progress through elementary school, althoughschool-age children still look primarily to parents for cues on how to behave. Nonetheless, weaksocial ties to conventional peers and associating with antisocial peers both exert small effects inchildhood.Children with weak social ties are those who attend few social activities and have low popularitywith conventional peers. School-age children often reject physically aggressive children becauseof their inappropriate behavior (Hann & Borek, in press; Reiss & Roth, 1993). The combinationof rejection and aggressiveness exacerbates behavior problems, making it more difficult foraggressive children to form positive relationships with other children. Indeed, recent researchindicates that children who are both aggressive and rejected show poorer adjustment inelementary school than children who are aggressive, rejected, or neither (Hann & Borek, inpress).Being drawn to antisocial peers may introduce or reinforce antisocial attitudes and behavior inchildren. Indeed, aggressive children tend to seek each other out (Hann & Borek, in press).CommunityCommunity risk factors, such as living in socially disorganized neighborhoods or neighborhoodswith high rates of crime, violence, and drugs, are not powerful individual-level predictors inchildhood because these external influences have less direct impact on children than onadolescents. They may well exert indirect influences through poor parenting practices, lack offamily resources, and parent criminality or antisocial behavior.SummaryThe most powerful early predictors of violence at age 15 to 18 are involvement in generaloffenses (serious, but not necessarily violent, criminal acts) and substance use. Moderate factorsare being male, aggressiveness, low family socioeconomic status/poverty, and antisocial parents.Risk Factors in AdolescenceViolence increases dramatically in the second decade of life, peaking during late adolescence at12 to 20 percent of all young people and dropping off again sharply by the early twenties. Someof these youths followed the childhood-onset trajectory, becoming violent before puberty andescalating their rate of offending during adolescence. But over half of all violent youths begintheir violent behavior in mid- to late adolescence. These youths gave little indication of problem
behavior in childhood and did not have poor relations with their parents.There are numerous theories about why violence begins in adolescence, but a few themes runthrough most of them (Elliott & Tolan, 1999; Pepler & Slaby, 1994). Developmentally, puberty isaccompanied by major physical and emotional changes that alter a young person's relationshipsand patterns of interaction with others. The transition into adolescence begins the move towardindependence from parents and the need to establish one's own values, personal and sexualidentity, and the skills and competencies needed to compete in adult society. Independencerequires young people to renegotiate family rules and degree of supervision by parents, a processthat can generate conflict and withdrawal from parents. At the same time, social networksexpand, and relationships with peers and adults in new social contexts equal or exceed inimportance the relationships with parents. The criteria for success and acceptance among peersand adults change.Adapting to all of these changes in relationships, social contexts, status, and performance criteriacan generate great stress, feelings of rejection, and anger at perceived or real failure. Youngpeople may be attracted to violent behavior as a way of asserting their independence of the adultworld and its rules, as a way of gaining the attention and respect of peers, as a way ofcompensating for limited personal competencies, or as a response to restricted opportunities forsuccess at school or in the community. Good relationships with parents during childhood willhelp in a successful transition to adolescence, but they do not guarantee it.Adolescents exposed to violence at home may experience some of the same emotions anddifficulties as younger school-age children -- for example, fear, guilt, anxiety, depression, andtrouble concentrating in school. In addition, adolescents may feel more vulnerable to violencefrom peers at school or gangs in their neighborhood and hopeless about their lives and their oddsof surviving to adulthood. These young people may not experience the growing feelings ofcompetence that are important at their stage of development. Ultimately, their exposure toviolence may lead them to become violent themselves. Studies have shown that adolescentsexposed to violence are more likely to engage in violent acts, often as preemptive strikes in theface of a perceived threat (Fagan & Wilkinson, 1998; Loeber et al., 1998; Singer et al., 1994,1995).Risk Factors by DomainNot surprisingly, different risk factors for violence assume importance in adolescence. Familyfactors lose predictive value relative to peer-oriented risk factors such as weak social ties toconventional peers, antisocial or delinquent friends, and membership in a gang (Table 4-1). Eveninvolvement in general offenses, which had the largest effect size in childhood, has only amoderate effect size in adolescence.IndividualIn early adolescence, involvement in general offenses -- that is, illegal but not necessarily violentacts, including felonies -- becomes a moderate risk factor for violence between the ages of 15and 18. Its predictive power lessens from childhood, largely because teenagers are somewhatmore likely than children to engage in illegal behavior.Psychological conditions, notably restlessness, difficulty concentrating, and risk taking, have
small effect sizes in adolescence. Restlessness and difficulty concentrating can affectperformance in school, a risk factor whose importance increases slightly in adolescence. Risktaking gains predictive power in early adolescence, particularly in combination with otherfactors. A reckless youth who sees violence as an acceptable means of expression, for example,is more likely to engage in violent behavior.Aggressiveness exerts a small effect on later violence among adolescent males, as does simplybeing male. While aggressiveness is unusual in children between the ages of about 6 and 10, it isnot terribly unusual in adolescence. Similarly, physical violence and crimes against persons inearly adolescence have a small effect on the likelihood of violence at ages 15 to 18.Antisocial attitudes and beliefs, including hostility toward police and a positive attitude towardviolence, are more important predictors among adolescent boys than they are among children,but their effect sizes remain small. Antisocial behavior and low IQ continue to have small effectsizes in adolescence.Substance use, which was a strong predictor of later violence for children, poses a small risk oflater violence for adolescents. The question as to whether drug use causes young people tobecome violent is complex and has been widely studied (see Miczek et al., 1994 for a review),but there is little compelling pharmacological evidence linking illicit drug use and violence. Inone large study, youths reported that over 80 percent of the violent incidents they initiated hadnot been preceded by drug use, including alcohol use (Huizinga et al., 1995). Thus, the risk maylie more in the characteristics of the social settings in which drug use and violence are likely tooccur than in any effect of drugs on behavior (Parker & Auerhahn, 1998; Reiss & Roth, 1993).The majority of violent adolescent offenders use alcohol and illicit drugs (see Chapter 3). Illicitdrug use tends to begin after the onset of violence and to be associated with more frequentviolent behavior and a longer criminal career (Elliott et al., 1989). This finding suggests that druguse may contribute to continued violence rather than to the onset of violence, but it is far fromconclusive. Evidence shows that some violent behavior stems from robberies or other attempts toget money to support a drug habit but also that this link is relatively rare. If any substance can besaid to cause youth violence, that substance is alcohol (APA, 1993; Parker & Auerhahn, 1998);however, this causal link is inconclusive because adolescent drinking is dependent to a largedegree on the situation and social context in which it takes place (for reviews, see Parker &Auerhahn, 1998; Pernanen, 1991; Reiss & Roth, 1993; Roizen, 1993).FamilyParents' direct influence on behavior is largely eclipsed by peer influence during adolescence.Not surprisingly, therefore, most family risk factors diminish in importance, including theinfluence of antisocial parents and low socioeconomic status, the most powerful early riskfactors. There are no large or even moderate risk factors in the family domain in adolescence.Poor parent-child relations continue to have a small effect size, but for adolescents this categoryincludes inadequate supervision and monitoring of young people's activities and low parentalinvolvement, in addition to inappropriate discipline (Elliott et al., 1985; Hawkins et al., 1998a;Patterson & Yoerger, 1997; Roitberg & Menard, 1995). Broken homes and parental abuse alsoexert small effects. Other adverse family conditions present a risk factor; for example, somestudies have found that family conflict is a risk factor for violence among adolescent males.
Although parents can and do influence their adolescents' behavior, they do so largely indirectly.The kind of peers chosen by young people, for example, is related to the relationship they havewith their parents (Elliott et al., 1989; Hill et al., 1999; Patterson & Yoerger, 1997; Simons et al.,1994).SchoolThere are no large or moderate risk factors for violence in the school domain, but poor attitudetoward or performance in school -- particularly if it leads to academic failure -- is a slightlylarger risk factor in early adolescence than in childhood.Research on school violence indicates that a culture of violence has arisen in some schools,adversely affecting not just students but teachers and administrators as well (Gottfredson et al., inpress; Lorion, 1998). Students exposed to violence at school may react by staying home to avoidthe threat or by taking weapons to school in order to defend themselves (Brener et al., 1999). Fortheir part, teachers may burn out after years of dealing with discipline problems and threats ofviolence.Schools located in socially disorganized neighborhoods are more likely to have a high rate ofviolence than schools in other neighborhoods (Laub & Lauritsen, 1998). At the same time,however, researchers emphasize that most of the violence to which young people are exposedtakes place in their home neighborhood or the neighborhood surrounding the school, not in theschool itself (Laub & Lauritsen, 1998). Individual schools, like individual students, do notnecessarily reflect the characteristics of the surrounding neighborhood. A stable, well-administered school in a violent neighborhood may function as a safe haven for students.Some gang activity takes place in schools, but school gangs are generally younger and lessviolent than street gangs, which form in neighborhoods (Laub & Lauritsen, 1998). Gangs inschools increased dramatically (by 87 percent) between 1989 and 1995 but have recentlydeclined (see Chapter 3). The chances of becoming a victim of violence are more than two andone-half times as great in schools where gangs are reported, and these schools aredisproportionately located in disadvantaged, disorganized neighborhoods (Met Life, 1993;Snyder & Sickmund, 1999).Peer groups complicate the picture further. They operate both in neighborhoods and in schools,but the concentration of young people in schools may intensify the influence of these groups.One large study of adolescent males found that some schools have dominant peer groups thatvalue academic achievement and disapprove of violence, while others have groups that approveof the use of violence (Felson et al., 1994). This study found that the risk of becoming involvedin violence varied depending on the dominant peer culture in their school, regardless of their ownviews about the use of violence.Peer GroupPeer groups are all-important in adolescence. Adolescents who have weak social ties -- that is,who are not involved in conventional social activities and are unpopular at school -- are at highrisk of becoming violent, as are adolescents with antisocial, delinquent peers. These two types ofpeer relationships often go together, since adolescents who are rejected by or unpopular withconventional peers may find acceptance only in antisocial or delinquent peer groups. Social
isolation -- having neither conventional nor antisocial friends -- is not a risk factor for violence,however (Cairns & Cairns, 1991; Elliott & Menard, 1996; Fergusson & Lynskey, 1996; Patterson& Yoerger, 1997). A third risk factor with a large effect size on violence is belonging to a gang.Gang membership increases the risk of violence above and beyond the risk posed by havingdelinquent peers (Thornberry, 1998). These three peer group factors appear to have independenteffects, they sometimes cluster together, and they are all powerful late predictors of violence inadolescence.Researchers who have studied what causes young people to join gangs have found that the riskfactors for gang membership are virtually the same as those for violence generally (Hill et al.,1999). The notion that gangs act as surrogate families for children who do not have close ties totheir own families is not borne out by recent data (Hill et al., 1999), but gangs do strengthenyoung people's sense of belonging, their independence from parents, and their self-esteem.Estimates from law enforcement agencies indicate that gang members are overwhelmingly maleand the great majority (almost 80 percent) are African American or Hispanic (Snyder &Sickmund, 1999). But surveys in which young people identify themselves as gang memberssuggest that there are substantially larger proportions of white and female gang members. In asurvey of nearly 6,000 8th graders in 1995, 25 percent of white students and 38 percent of femalestudents reported they were gang members (Esbensen & Osgood, 1997). Lacking comparisonswithin ethnic groups, it is difficult to tell whether ethnicity per se is a risk factor in gangmembership.CommunityIncreasing involvement in the community is a healthy part of adolescent development, unless thecommunity itself poses a threat to health and safety. Social disorganization and the presence ofcrime and drugs in the neighborhood pose a small risk of violence when measured on anindividual level, as they are in Table 4-1. As noted in the table, however, both of these riskfactors have a substantially greater effect on the neighborhood level, where they measure theaverage rate of violent offending by youths living in the neighborhood or community.Socially disorganized communities are characterized in part by economic and social flux, highturnover of residents, and a large proportion of disrupted or single-parent families, all of whichlessen the likelihood that adults will be involved in informal networks of social control. As aresult, there is generally little adult knowledge or supervision of the activities of teenagers and ahigh rate of crime. Moreover, in areas experiencing economic decline, there are likely to be fewneighborhood businesses. In such an environment, it is hard for young people to avoid beingdrawn into violence. Not only are they on their own after school, they are exposed to violentadults and youth gangs, they have few part-time job opportunities, and their neighborhood is notlikely to offer many after-school activities such as sports or youth groups (Bursik & Grasmick,1993; Sampson et al., 1997; Wilson, 1987).Social disorganization is also a risk factor for violence in rural areas. One study of ruralcommunities found that poverty plays a less important role in predicting violence than residentialinstability, broken homes, and other indicators of social disorganization (Osgood & Chambers,2000). In fact, very poor areas were not characterized by high residential instability or a largeproportion of broken homes. In cities, however, the combination of poverty with instability andfamily disruption is predictive of violence (Bursik & Grasmick, 1993; Elliott et al., 1996).
Adolescents who are exposed to violence in their neighborhood feel vulnerable and unable tocontrol their lives. These feelings can lead to helplessness and hopelessness. Such young peoplemay turn to violence as a way of asserting control over their surroundings. They may armthemselves or even join a gang for protection. Studies have shown that adolescents exposed toviolence are more likely to engage in violent acts, often as preemptive strikes in the face of aperceived threat (Singer et al., 1994, 1995).Neighborhood adults who are involved in crime pose a risk because young people may emulatethem. Easily available drugs add to the risk of violence. As noted earlier, drug use is associatedwith both a higher rate of offending and a longer criminal career (Elliott et al., 1989). Moreimportant, ready availability of drugs indicates that considerable drug trafficking is taking placein the neighborhood -- and drug trafficking is dangerous for buyer and seller alike.SummaryViolence peaks during the second decade of life. The youths who first became violent inchildhood escalate their violence in adolescence, and a larger group of young people embarks onviolence in adolescence. For some young people, violence represents a way of gaining therespect of peers, enhancing their sense of self-worth, or declaring their independence fromadults. Violence drops off as adolescents enter adulthood and assume adult roles.Parents' direct influence on behavior is largely supplanted in adolescence by peer influences.Thus the most powerful peer predictors of violence in adolescence are weak social ties toconventional peers, ties to antisocial, delinquent peers, and belonging to a gang.Unexpected Findings and EffectsThis chapter does not identify a number of characteristics and conditions frequently thought of asrisk factors. Furthermore, some of the risk factors that have been identified may exhibit smallereffect sizes than expected. There are two reasons for this. First, this report relies on longitudinalstudies, which identify risk factors and their effect sizes on the basis of their ability to predictfuture behavior. Much of this research involves identifying risks for aggression, externalizingbehavior, or antisocial behavior -- not risks for violence. While there is considerable overlapbetween the risk factors for aggression and those for violence, there are some importantdifferences, particularly with respect to effect sizes (Hann & Borek, in press). Televisionviolence, for example, has a very large effect on aggressive behavior but only a small effect onviolence. Second, some studies that have been widely cited in the media involve cross-sectionaland retrospective research designs, which are inappropriate for identifying factors that predictfuture violence.Conduct disorder has been linked to youth violence in numerous studies, but the cluster ofsymptoms used to determine this disorder includes physical aggressiveness, nonphysicalaggressiveness, and antisocial attitudes and beliefs. For purposes of predicting violence, thecritical question is: What components of this disorder actually confer risk? There is someevidence that physical aggression accounts for most of the predictive power of conduct disorder(Nagin & Tremblay, 1999) and has a moderate to small effect size as a predictor of violence.Antisocial attitudes and beliefs also predict violence, but with an even smaller effect size. Thethree components of conduct disorder generally cluster together, which accounts for their havingbeen combined into a single risk factor in earlier studies. Other childhood disorders such as
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, depressive and anxiety disorders, and their symptoms donot cause violent behavior, but their presence often signals serious behavioral and emotionalproblems that negatively affect family, social, and academic functioning, domains of risk forviolent behavior.Race has long been considered a risk factor for the onset of violence, and it is included as a riskfactor in most studies using simple bivariate predictors of violence. The question is whether racepredicts violence once other known risk factors are taken into account. Studies that haveaccounted for the effects of other known risk factors have typically found no significant effect ofrace on youth violence (Elliott et al., 1989; Reiss & Roth, 1993; Roitberg & Menard, 1995).Thus, race appears to be a risk marker rather than a risk factor. Race is a proxy for other knownrisk factors -- living in poor, single-parent families, doing poorly at school, and being exposed toneighborhood disadvantage, gangs, violence, and crime. The evidence suggests that the linkbetween race and violence is based largely on social and political distinctions rather thanbiological differences.Ethnicity has also been proposed as a risk factor, but it has not been studied extensively enoughto include here. Young people from ethnic minorities may be subject to prejudice and thus tolimited opportunity, and they may face unique stresses when their family culture conflicts withthe dominant U.S. culture. At the same time, their ethnic culture may offer them strong supportand guidance and thus function as a protective factor (APA, 1993).Child abuse is widely considered to be a powerful risk factor for youth violence. This belief isbased on a number of early studies that suffered from serious methodological problems (seeDodge et al., 1990; Garbarino & Plantz, 1986; Howing et al., 1990; and Widom, 1989 forreviews). In more sophisticated, controlled longitudinal studies, the effects are much smaller (seeTable 4-1), a finding that holds for both self-report and official record studies. In addition, studiesreporting on child abuse as a predictor of nonviolent delinquent behavior or less serious offensesfind larger effect sizes than those cited here for violence or serious delinquency (Bolton et al.,1977; Smith & Thornberry, 1995; Widom, 1989, 1991; Zingraff et al., 1993, 1994). Neithersexual abuse nor physical abuse is a significant predictor of youth violence when consideredalone (Hawkins et al., 1998c). Sexual abuse has been linked to criminal behavior in adulthood(Widom & Ames, 1994), but not to violence in adolescence.Although the effect size of child abuse or neglect is small when a correlation measure is used (asin Table 4-1), the relative risk of violence among abused or neglected children can be substantial.Knowing that a child was abused does not help much in predicting future violence, however,since the vast majority of abused children do not become violent. For example, one longitudinalstudy showed that 5 percent of abused children were arrested for a violent crime by age 18,compared to 3 percent of nonabused children (Widom, 1991). The relative risk of arrest forviolence is nearly twice as great in the abused group as in the nonabused group, yet thecorrelation for this relationship is .07, a small effect size. In other words, even though the6probability of later violence is substantially higher among abused than nonabused youths in thisstudy, the correlation is small because the majority of all youths (95 percent of abused and 97percent of nonabused youths) did not become violent.When the proportion of youths who become violent is greater, the relative risks appear to belower. Thus, when subjects in the 1991 Widom study were tracked to age 30, the relative risk of
violence dropped to 1.3 (Widom, 2000). In the one longitudinal self-report study to date, whichhad relatively high proportions of abused children reporting violence, the relative risk of violencewas 1.2 (Smith & Thornberry, 1995). In both of these cases, the correlation was less than .10.Heredity does not seem to play a strong role in violence (see Cary, 1994 for a review). Whilethere is some evidence supporting a genetic effect, the proposed mechanisms are very complexand nonspecific (Turbin, 2000). Neurotransmitters such as dopamine, serotonin, and GABA mayplay a role in aggression, but so far their mechanisms of action are unclear and there isinsufficient evidence to consider them predictors of violence. In general, there are no knownneurobiological patterns that are precise and specific enough to be considered reliable risk factorsfor violent behavior (Reiss & Roth, 1993).Drug trafficking in early adolescence predicts later violence (Hawkins et al., 1998c; Herrenkohlet al., 2000; Huizinga et al., 1995; Menard et al., in press; Reiss & Roth, 1993). This risk factoris not included here because only one study presents correlations (or the data necessary tocalculate them); therefore, average effect size could not be estimated. In the Menard et al. study,the correlation between selling marijuana and violence in adolescence was .33; for selling harddrugs, it was .27. In the Hawkins et al. study, the odds ratio for selling drugs at age 14 andviolence at age 18 was 3.34; it was 4.55 for selling at age 16 and violence at age 18. Drug sellingthus appears to have at least a moderate effect size.Proposed Protective Factors in Childhood and AdolescenceResearch on resilience and the public health approach to the problem of youth violence havebrought a new awareness of, and research on, protective factors -- those aspects of the individualand his or her environment that buffer or moderate the effect of risk. Identifying andunderstanding how protective factors operate is potentially as important to violence preventionand intervention efforts as research on risk factors.To date, the evidence regarding protective factors against violence has not met the standardsestablished for risk factors. Therefore, this report does not refer to protective factors, only toproposed protective factors (Table 4-2). There are several reasons for this: Not all studies defineprotective factors as buffering the effects of risk; most studies have looked for an effect onantisocial behavior in general, not on violence specifically; and those that have found bufferingeffects on violence have not been adequately replicated. This does not mean that protectivefactors do not exist, just that more research is needed to identify them.7          Table          Table 4-2. Proposed protective factors, evidence of buffering          risk, and outcome affected, by domain.Most studies of protective factors do not specify when in the course of development these factorsexert their buffering effects or how they change over the life course. Further study is needed toclarify these points; therefore, Table 4-2 does not show age of onset for the proposed protectivefactors listed.A Note on Sources
The authors of a 1995 longitudinal study on protective factors and their buffering effects on therisk of problem behavior in adolescence (Jessor et al., 1995) recently reexamined their data to seewhether they could find any buffering effect specifically on violence. They did find a bufferingeffect, but their results must be considered preliminary until they are replicated by others.Nonetheless, these findings are encouraging, since they indicate that several of the factorsidentified as protective against problem behavior also provided a buffering effect againstviolence. By implication, other studies that have demonstrated buffering effects on the risk ofantisocial behavior or general delinquency (for example, Fergusson & Lynskey, 1996) may alsocontain evidence of potential protective factors against violence. The discussion of proposedprotective factors in this report rests on the reanalysis of the 1995 study data (Turbin, 2000), aswell as on results from other studies, bearing in mind the caveats noted above.The 1995 Jessor study grouped possible protective factors together and found that students whoscored high on this index of protection were buffered from the effects of risk, compared tostudents who scored low on the index. The index was composed of seven psychosocial protectivefactors: attitudinal intolerance of deviance, positive orientation to health, religiosity, positiverelations with adults, perceived consequences for misbehavior, friends as models forconventional behaviors, and high involvement in conventional activities. In an analysis ofspecific factors, however, only two -- an intolerant attitude toward deviance and commitment toschool -- had significant protective effects. The new findings show that the same two factorsappear to exert a significant, though small, buffering effect on risk factors for violence.Proposed Protective Factors by DomainOne of the proposed protective factors shown to have a buffering effect on the risk of violence isan individual characteristic, and the other falls into the domain of school; both are classed ashaving a small effect. No other factors in the individual, family, school, or peer group domainshave been shown to exert significant buffering effects on risk factors for violence, although theyhave been shown to moderate the risk of antisocial behavior or delinquency. No protectivefactors have been proposed yet in the community domain.IndividualAn intolerant attitude toward deviance, including violent behavior, is the strongest proposedprotective factor. It reflects a commitment to traditional values and norms as well as disapprovalof activities that violate these norms. Young people whose attitudes are antithetical to violenceare unlikely to become involved in activities that could lead to violence or to associate with peerswho are delinquent or violent.The four remaining individual factors have not yet been shown to moderate violence, althoughthey may buffer risks for antisocial behavior or general delinquency. High IQ has been cited as apossible protective factor (Fergusson & Lynskey, 1996; Garmezy, 1985; Rutter, 1985; Werner &Smith, 1982). Children with above-average IQs may exhibit qualities, such as curiosity andcreativity, that help them make the most of early educational, artistic, and cultural experiences.Above-average IQ can also help a child excel in school. High IQ may increase an adolescent'schances of benefiting from educational, creative, and cultural opportunities. For youths facingmultiple risk factors, exposure to the wider world may open a window on alternative values andlifestyles.
Being born female has also been cited (Garmezy, 1985; Rutter, 1985; Werner & Smith, 1982),but it is the opposite of being born male, a risk factor, and as yet there is no evidence of abuffering effect. Being a girl entails less exposure to violence, less impulsiveness and daring, andbeing expected to behave less aggressively than boys.Some studies have proposed positive social orientation as a protective factor (Garmezy, 1985;Jessor et al., 1998; Rutter, 1985; Werner & Smith, 1982). Like commitment to school, a positivesocial orientation indicates that a young person has adopted traditional values and norms, aslightly different emphasis than intolerance of deviance. This proposed factor appears to be theopposite of antisocial attitudes and beliefs, a late-onset risk factor that has a small effect size.Perceived sanctions for transgressions, a protective factor in the earlier Jessor study (1995),refers to perceived peer disapproval of deviant behavior. The reanalysis of those original datareveals that this proposed factor has no significant protective effect on risk of violence orproblem behavior.FamilyThere is no doubt that an essential aspect of healthy child development is forming a secureattachment in infancy to a parent or other adult who senses and responds to a baby's needs (Bell& Fink, 2000). Likewise, researchers agree that having a loving adult who is interested in andsupportive of a child or young person's ideas and activities helps that child or adolescent developthe confidence and competence needed to progress from one stage of development to the next.Good relations with an adult who supports conventional behavior and disapproves of delinquentbehavior can provide invaluable guidance for young people. The question is whether theserelationships moderate the effects of exposure to risk and thus fit the definition of a protectivefactor.A warm, supportive relationship with parents or other adults has been shown to protect againstantisocial behavior, but studies so far have not found a significant buffering effect on the risk ofviolence (Hawkins et al., 1998c; Klein & Forehand, 2000; Rutter, 1979; Turbin, 2000; Werner &Smith, 1992).It is uncertain whether family protective factors, like family risk factors, become less influentialas young people progress through adolescence. Parental support and encouragement remainimportant, but even parents who have had a good relationship with their children before pubertymay affect their adolescents' behavior only indirectly -- for example, through choice of friends(Elliott et al., 1989). This indirect influence is not inconsequential, however; associating withpeers who disapprove of violence may inhibit later violence in young people (Hawkins et al.,1998c), and parents' positive evaluation of peers has been found to reduce the risk of delinquency(Smith et al., 1995).Several studies have pointed to monitoring or supervision of activities as a protective factoragainst delinquency and antisocial behavior, but this is essentially the opposite of failure tomonitor, an adolescent-onset risk factor with a small effect size. To date, no evidence ofmoderating effects on the risk of violence has been presented (Baldwin et al., 1990; Klein &Forehand, 2000; Smith et al., 1995).School
Commitment to school is the second proposed protective factor that has been found to buffer therisk of youth violence. Young people who are committed to school have embraced the goals andvalues of an influential social institution. Such young people are unlikely to engage in violence,both because it is incompatible with their orientation and because it would jeopardize theirachievement in school and their standing with adults (Jessor et al., 1995; Turbin, 2000). Thisproposed factor is included because it appears to buffer the risk of violence, not because it is theopposite of poor attitude toward or performance in school, a risk factor with small effect sizes inboth childhood and adolescence.School can give adolescents who face multiple risk factors a place in which to excel socially andacademically. Achievement in school and the approval of teachers provide the recognition soimportant to adolescent development -- recognition some adolescents do not receive from othersources. Encouragement from teachers can give young people the confidence to seek continuededucational or job skills training. In addition, schools with peer groups that value academicachievement may lower students' risk of becoming involved in violence (Felson et al., 1994).Unfortunately, schools with a culture of violence may be unable to exert their very importantprotective function.Extracurricular activities in art, music, drama, school publications, and the like give adolescentsan opportunity to participate in constructive group activities and achieve recognition for theirefforts. Studies have found that recognition for or involvement in conventional activities --whether family, school, extracurricular, religious, or community -- is a protective factor againstantisocial behavior (Jessor et al., 1995; Rae-Grant et al., 1989). The reanalysis of the Jessor datashows that involvement in family, volunteer, and school club activities other than sports has aninsignificant effect on risk for violence (Turbin, 2000).Peer GroupHaving friends who behave conventionally is a proposed protective factor that seems to reducethe risk of delinquency, but there is no evidence of a true buffering effect on specific risk factors.Buffering effects on violence were not significant in the reanalysis of the Jessor data (Turbin,2000; see also Smith et al., 1995). However, as noted earlier, researchers have found thatassociating with peers who disapprove of violence may inhibit violence in young people(Hawkins et al., 1998c; Jessor et al., 1995).SummaryAlthough the body of research on protective factors is growing, very little work has been donespecifically on protective factors that buffer the risk of violence. Some researchers haveidentified individual and environmental characteristics that can be considered candidates forprotective factors. Lacking adequate scientific evidence of the nature, mechanism, size, andtiming of these candidates' moderating effects, however, this report considers all of themproposed protective factors.One recent reanalysis of earlier data has found two proposed protective factors that seem tobuffer the risk of violence -- an intolerant attitude toward deviance and commitment to school.These two factors appear to exert a statistically significant, though small, buffering effect on therisk of violence, but until these findings are replicated, they must be considered preliminary.
Identifying and understanding how protective factors operate is as important to preventing andstopping violence as identifying and understanding risk factors. This area of the public healthapproach to youth violence cries out for more research.ConclusionsScientists have identified a number of personal characteristics and environmental conditions thatput children and adolescents at risk of violent behavior and some that seem to protect them fromthe effects of risk. These risk and protective factors can be found in every area of life, they exertdifferent effects at different stages of development, they tend to appear in clusters, and theyappear to gain strength in numbers. The public health approach to youth violence involvesidentifying risk and protective factors, determining when in the life course they typically comeinto play, designing preventive programs that can be put in place at just the right time to be mosteffective, and making the public aware of these findings.Many years of research have yielded valuable insights into the risk factors involved in the onsetand developmental course of violence. Less work has been done on protective factors, but thatsituation is changing. Some basic principles have emerged from these studies:Risk and protective factors exist in every area of life -- individual, family, school, peergroup, and community. Individual characteristics interact in complex ways with a child'sor adolescent's environment to produce violent behavior.Risk and protective factors vary in predictive power depending on when in the course ofhuman development they occur. As children move from infancy to early adulthood,some risk factors will become more important and others less important. Substance use,for example, is a far more powerful risk factor at age 9 than it is at age 14.Risk factors do not operate in isolation -- the more risk factors a child or young personis exposed to, the greater the likelihood that he or she will become violent. Risk factorscan be buffered by protective factors, however. An adolescent with an intolerant attitudetoward violence is unlikely to engage in violence, even if he or she is associating withdelinquent peers, a major risk factor for violence at that age.Risk factors increase the likelihood that a young person will become violent, but theymay not actually cause a young person to become violent. Scientists view them asreliable predictors or even as probable causes of youth violence. They are useful foridentifying vulnerable populations that may be amenable to intervention efforts.Risk markers such as race or ethnicity are frequently confused with risk factors; riskmarkers have no causal relation to violence.No single risk factor or combination of factors can predict violence with unerringaccuracy. Few young people exposed to a single risk factor will become involved inviolent behavior; similarly, most young people exposed to multiple risks will notbecome violent. By the same token, protective factors cannot guarantee that a childexposed to risk will not become violent.Researchers have identified at least two onset trajectories for youth violence: achildhood trajectory that begins before puberty and an adolescent one that begins after
puberty. Violence peaks during the second decade of life. The small group of offenderswho began their violent behavior in childhood commits more violent offenses, and thelarger group of adolescent offenders begins to become involved in violence.Early risk factors for violence in adolescence include involvement in serious (but notnecessarily violent) criminal acts and substance use before puberty, being male,aggressiveness, low family socioeconomic status/poverty, and antisocial parents. All ofthese early risks stem from a child's individual characteristics and interaction with his orher family. The influence of family is largely supplanted in adolescence by peerinfluences; thus, risk factors with the largest predictive effects in adolescence includeweak social ties to conventional peers, ties to antisocial or delinquent peers, andbelonging to a gang. Committing serious (but not necessarily violent) criminal offensesis also an important risk factor in adolescence. Drug selling is a risk factor, but its effectsize has not been established.Identifying and understanding how protective factors operate is potentially as importantto preventing and stopping violence as identifying and understanding risk factors.Several protective factors have been proposed, but to date only two have been found tobuffer the risk of violence -- an intolerant attitude toward deviance and commitment toschool. Protective factors warrant more research attention.Violence prevention and intervention efforts hinge on identifying risk and protective factors anddetermining when in the course of development they emerge. More research in these areas isneeded, particularly concerning why violence stops or continues in childhood and adolescence.Nonetheless, the research carried out to date provides a solid foundation for programs aimed atreducing risk factors and promoting protective ones -- and thereby preventing violence, thesubject of Chapter 5.References1. American Psychological Association Violence and youth: Psychology's response.Volume I: Summary report of the American Psychological Association Commission onViolence and Youth. Washington, DC. (1993).2. Anderson, C. A., & Bushman, B. J(in press). Effects of violent video games onaggressive behavior, aggressive cognition, aggressive affect, physiological arousal, andprosocial behavior: A meta-analytic review of scientific literature. [PubMed: 11554666]3. Baldwin, A. L., Baldwin, C., & Cole, R. E(1990). Stress-resistant families and stress-resistant children. In J. E. Rolf, D. Cicchetti, S. Weintraub, A. S. Masten, & K.Neuchterlein (Eds.), Risk and protective factors in the development of psychopathology(pp. 257-280). New York: Cambridge University Press.4. Bell, C. C., & Fink, P. J Prevention of violence. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. (2000).5. Belsky, J., & Vondra, JChild maltreatment: Prevalence, consequences, causes andintervention. In D. H. Crowell, I. M. Evans, & C. R. O'Donnell (Eds.), Childhoodaggression and violence: Sources of influence, prevention, and control (pp. 161-185).New York: Perseus Publishing. (1987).6. Bolton, F. G., Reich, J. W., & Gutierres, S. E Delinquency patterns in maltreatedchildren and siblings. Victimology, . (1977);2:349   357.7. Brener, N. D., Simon, T. R., Krug, E. G., & Lowry, R Recent trends in violence-related
behaviors among high school students in the United States. Journal of the AmericanMedical Association, . (1999);282:440   446. [PubMed: 10442659]8. Brewer, D. D., Hawkins, J. D., Catalano, R. F., & Neckerman, H. JPreventing serious,violent, and chronic juvenile offenders: A review of evaluations of selected strategies inchildhood, adolescence, and the community. In J. C. Howell, B. Krisberg, J. D.Hawkins, & J. J. Wilson (Eds.), A sourcebook: Serious, violent, and chronic juvenileoffenders (pp. 61-141). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. (1995).9. Bursik, R. J. Jr., & Grasmick, H. G Neighborhoods and crime: The dimensions ofeffective community control. New York: Lexington Books. (1993).10. Cairns, R. B., & Cairns, B. DSocial cognition and social networks: A developmentalperspective. In D. J. Pepler & K. H. Rubin (Eds.), The development and treatment ofchildhood aggression (pp. 249-278). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. (1991).11. Cairns, R. B., Cairns, B. D., Neckerman, H. J., Gest, S. D., & Gariepy, J Social networksand aggressive behavior: Peer support or peer rejection? Developmental Psychology, .(1988);24:815   823.12. Cary, G(1994). Genetics and violence. In A. J. Reiss, Jr. & J. A. Roth (Eds.),Understanding and preventing violence. Biobehavioral influences (Vol. 2, pp. 21-53).Washington, DC: National Academy Press.13. Catalano, R. F., Arthur, M. W., Hawkins, J. D., Bergland, L., & Olson, J.JComprehensive community- and school-based interventions to prevent antisocialbehavior. In R. Loeber & D. P. Farrington (Eds.), Serious and violent juvenile offenders:Risk factors and successful interventions (pp. 248-283). Thousand Oaks, CA: SagePublications. (1998).14. Cicchetti, D., & Toth, S. L A developmental psychopathology perspective on childabuse and neglect. Journal of the American Academy of Child and AdolescentPsychiatry, . (1995);34:541   565. [PubMed: 7775351]15. Davis, N. J Resilience: Status of the research and research-based programs. Rockville,MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Center for MentalHealth Services, Division of Program Development, Special Populations and Projects,Special Programs Development Branch. (1999).16. Dembo, R., Williams, L., Wothke, W., Schneidler, J., & Brown, C The role of familyfactors: Physical abuse, and sexual victimization experiences in high risk youths' alcoholand other drug use and delinquency: longitudinal model. Violence and Victims, .(1992);7:233   246. [PubMed: 1294239]17. Dodge, K., Bates, L., & Pettet, G Mechanisms in the cycle of violence. Science, .(1990);250:1628   1683. [PubMed: 2270481]18. Earls, F.J Violence and today's youth. Critical Health Issues for Children and Youth, .(1994);4:4   23.19. Elliott, D.S., Huizinga, D., & Ageton, S. S Explaining delinquency and drug use.Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications. (1985).20. Elliott, D.S., Huizinga, D., & Menard, S(1989). Multiple problem youth: Delinquency,substance use and mental health problems. New York: Springer-Verlag.21. Elliott, D. S., & Menard, S(1996). Delinquent friends and delinquent behavior:Temporal and developmental patterns. In J. D. Hawkins (Ed.), Delinquency and crime:Current theories (pp. 28-67). Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge UniversityPress.
22. Elliott, D. S., & Tolan, P. H(1999). Youth violence prevention, intervention and socialpolicy: An overview. In D. J. Flannery & C. R. Huff (Eds.), Youth violence: Prevention,intervention and social policy (pp. 3-46). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.23. Elliott, D.S., Wilson, W.J., Huizinga, D., Elliott, A.C., & Ranking, B The effects ofneighborhood disadvantage on youth development. Journal of Research in Crime andDelinquency, . (1996);33:389   426.24. Esbensen, F., & Huizinga, D Juvenile victimization and delinquency. Youth and Society,. (1991);23:202   228.25. Esbensen, F. A., & Osgood, D. W National Evaluation of G.R.E.A.T. (NCJ 167264).Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, NationalInstitute of Justice. (1997).26. Fagan, J Interactions among drugs, alcohol, and violence. Health Affairs, .(1993);12:65   79. [PubMed: 8125449]27. Fagan, J., & Wilkinson, D(1998). Social contexts and functions of adolescent violence.In D. S. Elliott, B. A. Hamburg, & K. R. Williams (Eds.), Violence in American schools:A new perspective (pp. 55-93). New York: Cambridge University Press.28. Farrington, D.P Early prediction of violent and non-violent youthful offending.European Journal on Criminal Policy and Research, . (1997);5:51   66.29. Farrington, D. P., & West, D. J Criminal, penal and life histories of chronic offenders:Risk and protective factors and early identification. Criminal Behavior and MentalHealth, . (1993);3:492   523.30. Felson, R. B., Liska, A. E., South, S. J., & McNulty, T. L The subculture of violence anddelinquency: Individual vs. school context effects. Social Forces, . (1994);73:155   173.31. Fergusson, D. M., & Lynskey, M. T Adolescent resiliency to family adversity. Journalof Child Psychology and Psychiatry, . (1996);37:281   292. [PubMed: 8707911]32. Furstenberg, F. F., Elder, G. H., Cook, T. D., Eccles, J., & Sameroff, A(1999). Managingto make it: Urban families and adolescent success. Chicago: University of ChicagoPress.33. Garbarino, J., and Plantz, M. CChild abuse and juvenile delinquency: What are thelinks? In J. Garbarino (Ed.), Troubled youth, troubled families. New York: AldinedeGruyter. (1986).34. Garmezy, N(1985). Stress-resistant children: The search for protective factors. In J. E.Stevenson (Ed.), Recent research in developmental psychopathology (pp. 213-233).New York: Elsevier Science.35. Gottfredson, D. C., Wilson, D. B., & Najaka, S. S(in press). School-based crimeprevention. In D. P. Farrington, L. W. Sherman, & B. Welsh (Eds.), Evidence-basedcrime prevention. London, United Kingdom: Harwood Academic Publishers.36. Guerra, N. GSerious and violent juvenile offenders: Gaps in knowledge and researchpriorities. In R. Loeber & D. P. Farrington (Eds.), Serious and violent juvenile offenders:Risk factors and successful interventions (pp. 389-404). Thousand Oaks, CA: SagePublications. (1998).37. Hann, D. M., & Borek, N. T(Eds.). (in press). NIMH taking stock of risk factors forchild/youth externalizing behavior problems. Washington, DC: U.S. GovernmentPrinting Office.38. Hawkins, J. D., Catalano, R. F., and Miller, J. Y Risk and protective factors for alcoholand other drug problems in adolescence and early adulthood: Implications for substance
abuse prevention. Psychological Bulletin, . (1992);112:64   105. [PubMed: 1529040]39. Hawkins, J. D., Laub, J. H., & Lauritsen, J. LRace, ethnicity, and serious juvenileoffending. In R. Loeber & D. P. Farrington (Eds.), Serious and violent juvenileoffenders: Risk factors and successful interventions (pp. 30-46). Thousand Oaks, CA:Sage Publications. (1998a).40. Hawkins, J. D., Farrington, D. P., & Catalano, R. F(1998b). Reducing violence throughthe schools. In D. S. Elliott, B. A. Hamburg, & K. R. Williams (Eds.), Violence inAmerican schools: A new perspective (pp. 188-216). New York: Cambridge UniversityPress.41. Hawkins, J. D., Herrenkohl, T. L., Farrington, D. P., Brewer, D., Catalano, R. F., &Harachi, T. WA review of predictors of youth violence. In R. Loeber & D. P. Farrington(Eds.), Serious and violent juvenile offenders: Risk factors and successful interventions(pp. 106-146). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. (1998c).42. Herrenkohl, T. L., Maguin, E., Hill, K. G., Hawkins, J. D., Abbott, R. D., & Catalano, R.F Developmental risk factors for youth violence. Journal of Adolescent Health, .(2000);6:176   186. [PubMed: 10706165]43. Hill, K. G., Howell, J. C., Hawkins, J. D., & Battin-Pearson, S. R Childhood risk factorsfor adolescent gang membership: Results from the Seattle Social Development Project.Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, . (1999);36:300   322.44. Howing, P. T., Wodarski, J. S., Kurtz, P. D., Gaudin, J. M. Jr., & Herbst, E. N Childabuse and delinquency: The empirical and theoretical links. Social Work, .(1990);35:244   249. [PubMed: 2193402]45. Huesmann, L. R., & Eron, L. DEarly predictors of criminality. Paper presented at the24th International Congress of Psychology, Sydney, Australia. (1988).46. Huesmann, L. R., Moise, J., Podolski, C. L., & Eron, L(submitted). Longitudinalrelations between children's exposure to television violence and their later aggressiveand violent behavior in young adulthood: 1977-1992. [PubMed: 12661882]47. Huizinga, D., Loeber, R., & Thornberry, T. P Recent findings from the program ofresearch on the causes and correlates of delinquency (U.S. Department of Justice,Office of Justice Programs, Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, NCJ159042). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. (1995).48. Jessor, R. J., Turbin, M. S., & Costa, F. M Risk and protection in successful outcomesamong disadvantaged adolescents. Applied Developmental Science, . (1998);2:194   208.49. Jessor, R. J., van den Bos, J., Vanderryn, J., Costa, F. M., & Turbin, M. S Protectivefactors in adolescent problem behavior: Moderator effects and developmental change.Developmental Psychology, . (1995);31:923   933.50. Kindlon, D. J., Tremblay, R. E., Mezzacappa, E., Earls, F., Laurent, D., & Schaal, BLongitudinal patterns of heart rate and fighting behavior in 9- through 12-year-old boys.Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, . (1995);34:371   377. [PubMed: 7896679]51. Klein, K., & Forehand, R Family processes as resources for African American childrenexposed to a constellation of sociodemographic risk factors. Family Health ProjectGroup. Journal of Clinical Psychology, . (2000);29:53   65. [PubMed: 10693032]52. Kraemer, H. C. Kazdin, A. E., Offord, D. R., Kessler, R. C., Jensen, P. S., & Kupfer, D.J Coming to terms with the terms of risk. Archives of General Psychiatry, .(1997);54:337   343. [PubMed: 9107150]
53. Laub, J. H., & Lauritsen, J. L(1998). The interdependence of school violence withneighborhood and family conditions. In D. S. Elliott, B. A. Hamburg, & K. R. Williams(Eds.), Violence in American schools: A new perspective (pp. 127-155). New York:Cambridge University Press.54. Lipsey, M. W., & Derzon, J. HPredictors of violent and serious delinquency inadolescence and early adulthood: A synthesis of longitudinal research. In R. Loeber &D. P. Farrington (Eds.), Serious and violent juvenile offenders: Risk factors andsuccessful interventions (pp. 86-105). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. (1998).55. Loeber, R.D, Farrington, D. P., & Waschbusch, D. ASerious and violent juvenileoffenders. In R. Loeber & D. P. Farrington (Eds.), Serious and violent juvenileoffenders: Risk factors and successful interventions (pp. 13-29). Thousand Oaks, CA:Sage Publications. (1998).56. Lorion, R(1998). Exposure to urban violence: Contamination of the school environment.In D. S. Elliott, B. A. Hamburg, & K. R. Williams (Eds.), Violence in American schools:A new perspective (pp. 293-311). New York: Cambridge University Press.57. Marans, S., & Adelman, A(1997). Experiencing violence in a developmental context. InJ. D. Osofsky (Ed.), Children in a violent society (pp. 202-222). New York: GuilfordPress.58. Menard, S., Mihalic, S. W., & Huizinga, D (in press) The drugs-violence relationship indevelopmental perspective. Justice Quarterly. .59. Metropolitan Life Foundation Violence in America's public schools: The familyperspective (Metropolitan Life Survey of the American Teacher, 1994). New York.(1993).60. Miczek, K. A., DeBold, J. F., Haney, M., Tidey, J., Vivian, J., & Weertz, E. M(1994).Alcohol, drugs of abuse, aggression and violence. In A. J. Reiss, Jr. & J. A. Roth (Eds.),Understanding and preventing violence. Social influences (Vol. 3, pp. 377-570).Washington, DC: National Academy Press.61. Milavsky, J. R., Kessler, R., Stipp, H., Rubens, W. S., Pearl, D., Bouthilet, L., & Lazar,J. (Eds.) Television and behavior: Ten years of scientific progress and implications forthe eighties. Vol. 2: Technical Reviews (DHHS Publication No. ADM 82-1196).Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. (1982).62. Moffitt, T. E Parental mental disorder and offspring criminal behavior: An adoptionstudy. Psychiatry, . (1987);50:346   360. [PubMed: 3423160]63. Moffitt, T., Caspi, A., Dickson, N., Silva, P., & Stanton, W Childhood-onset versusadolescents-onset antisocial conduct problems in males: Natural history from ages 3 to18 years. Development and Psychopathology, . (1996);8:399   424.64. Nagin, D., & Tremblay, R. E Trajectories of boys' physical aggression, opposition, andhyperactivity on the path to physically violent and nonviolent juvenile delinquency.Child Development, . (1999);70:1181   1196. [PubMed: 10546339]65. Osgood, D. W., & Chambers, J. M Social disorganization outside the metropolis: Ananalysis of rural youth violence. Criminology, . (2000);38:81   111.66. Osofsky, J. D The impact of violence on children. Future of Children, . (1999);9:33   49.[PubMed: 10777999]67. Paik, H., & Comstock, G The effects of television violence on antisocial behavior: Ameta-analysis. Communication Research, . (1994);21:516   546.68. Parker, R. N., & Auerhahn, K Alcohol, drugs and violence. Annual Review of Sociology,
. (1998);24:291   311.69. Patterson, G. R., & Yoerger, K A developmental model for late-onset delinquency.Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, . (1997);44:119   177. [PubMed: 9385595]70. Pepler, D. J., & Slaby, R. GTheoretical and developmental perspectives on youth andviolence. In L. D. Eron, J. H. Gentry, & P. Schlegel (Eds.), Reason to hope: Apsychosocial perspective on violence and youth (pp. 27-58). Washington, DC: AmericanPsychological Association. (1994).71. Pernanen, K(1991). Alcohol in human violence. New York: Guilford Press.72. Pynoos, R., & Nader, K Psychological first aid for children who witness communityviolence. Journal of Traumatic Stress, . (1988);1:445   473.73. Rae-Grant, N., Thomas, B. H., Offord, D. R., & Boyle, M. H Risk, protective factors,and the prevalence of behavioral and emotional disorders in children and adolescents.Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, . (1989);28:262   268. [PubMed: 2925581]74. Raine, A., Venables, P. H., & Mednick, S. A Low resting heart rate at age 3 yearspredisposes to aggression at age 11 years: Evidence from the Mauritius child healthproject. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, .(1997);36:1457   1464. [PubMed: 9334560]75. Reiss, A. J. Jr., & Roth, J. A(1993). Understanding and preventing violence.Washington, DC: National Academy Press.76. Resnick, M. D., Bearman, P. S., Blum, R. W., Bauman, K. E., Harris, K. M., Jones, J.,Tabor, J., Beuhring, T., Sieving, R. E., Shew, M., Ireland, M., Bearinger, L. H., & Udry,J. R Protecting adolescents from harm. Findings from the National Longitudinal Studyon Adolescent Health. Journal of the American Medical Association, . (1997);278:823   832. [PubMed: 9293990]77. Roitberg, T., & Menard, S Adolescent violence: A test of integrated theory. Studies inCrime and Crime Prevention, . (1995);4:177   196.78. Roizen, JIssues in the epidemiology of alcohol and violence. In S. E. Martin (Ed.),Alcohol and interpersonal violence: Fostering multidisciplinary perspectives (pp. 3-36).Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service,National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.(1993).79. Rolf, J., Masten, A. S., & Neuchterlein, K(1993). Risk and protective factors in thedevelopment of psychopathology. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge UniversityPress.80. Rosay, A. B., Gottfredson, D. C., Armstrong, T. A., & Harmon, M. A Invariance ofmeasures of prevention program effectiveness. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, .(2000);16:341   367.81. Rutter, M Psychosocial resilience and protective mechanisms. American Journal ofOrthopsychiatry, . (1987);57:316   331. [PubMed: 3303954]82. Rutter, M Resilience in the face of adversity: Protective factors and resistance topsychiatric disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, . (1985);147:598   611. [PubMed:3830321]83. Rutter, M(1979). Protective factors in children's responses to stress and disadvantage. InM. W. Kent & J. E. Rolf (Eds.), Primary prevention of psychopathology. Socialcompetence in children (Vol. 3, pp. 49-74). Hanover, NH: University Press of New
England.84. Rutter, M., Maughan, B., Mortimore, P., Ouston, J., & Smith, A(1979). Fifteen thousandhours: Secondary schools and their effects on children. Cambridge, MA: HarvardUniversity Press.85. Sameroff, A. J., Seifer, R., & Baldwin, C Stability of intelligence from pre-school toadolescence: The influence of social and family risk factors. Child Development, .(1993);64:80   97. [PubMed: 8436039]86. Sampson, R. J., and Groves, W. B Community structures and crime: Testing socialdisorganization theory. American Journal of Sociology, . (1989);94:774   802.87. Sampson, R. J., & Laub, J. H Crime and deviance over the life course: The salience ofadult social bonds. American Sociological Review, . (1990);55:609   627.88. Sampson, R. J., & Lauritsen, J. L(1994). Violent victimization and offending:Individual-, situational-, and community-level risk factors. In A. J. Reiss, Jr. & J. A.Roth (Eds.), Understanding and preventing violence. Social influences (Vol. 3, pp. 1-114). Washington, DC: National Academy Press.89. Sampson, R. J. Raudenbush, S. W., & Earls, F Neighborhoods and violent crime: Amultilevel study of collective efficacy. Science, . (1997);277:918   924. [PubMed:9252316]90. Silverman, A. B. Reinherz, H. Z., & Ginconia, R. M The long-term sequelae of childand adolescent abuse: A longitudinal community study. Child Abuse & Neglect, .(1996);20:709   724. [PubMed: 8866117]91. Simcha-Fagan, O., & Schwartz, J. E Neighborhood and delinquency: An assessment ofcontextual effects. Criminology, . (1986);24:667   703.92. Simons, R. L. Wu, C. I., Conger, R. D., & Lorenz, F. O Two routes to delinquencydifferences between early and late starters in the impact of parenting and deviant peers.Criminology, . (1994);32:247   275.93. Singer, M., Anglin, T. M., Song, L., & Lunghofer, L Adolescents' exposure to violenceand associated symptoms of psychological trauma. Journal of the American MedicalAssociation, . (1995);273:477   482. [PubMed: 7837366]94. Singer, M., Anglin, T. M., Song, L., & Lunghofer, L(1994). The mental healthconsequences of adolescents' exposure to violence. Cleveland, OH: Case WesternReserve University Press.95. Smith, C., Lizotte, A. J., Thornberry, T. P., & Krohn, M. D(1995). Resilient youth:Identifying factors that prevent high-risk youth from engaging in delinquency and drugs.In J. Hagan (Ed.), Delinquency and disrepute in the life course (pp. 217-247).Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.96. Smith, C., & Thornberry, T. P The relationship between childhood maltreatment andadolescent involvement in delinquency. Criminology, . (1995);33:451   481.97. Snyder, H. N. & Sickmund, M Juvenile offenders and victims: 1999 national report(NCJ 178257). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Juvenile Justiceand Delinquency Prevention. (1999).98. Stattin, H., & Magnusson, D Antisocial development: A holistic approach. Developmentand Psychopathology, . (1996);8:617   645.99. Stattin, H., Romelsj  , A., & Stenbacka, M Personal resources as modifiers of the riskfor future criminality: An analysis of protective factors in relation to 18-year-old boys.British Journal of Criminology, . (1997);37:198   223.
100. Thornberry, T. PMembership in youth gangs and involvement in serious, violentoffending. In R. Loeber & D. P. Farrington (Eds.), Serious and violent juvenileoffenders: Risk factors and successful interventions (pp. 147-166). Thousand Oaks, CA:Sage Publications. (1998).101. Thornberry, T. P. Huizinga, D., & Loeber, RThe prevention of serious delinquency andviolence: Implications from the program of research on the causes and correlates ofdelinquency. In J. C. Howell, B. Krisberg, J. D. Hawkins, & J. J. Wilson (Eds.), Asourcebook: Serious, violent and chronic juvenile offenders (pp. 213-237). ThousandOaks, CA: Sage Publications. (1995).102. Turbin, M. SPersonal communication. (2000).103. Van Hulle, C. A. Corley, R., Zahn-Waxler, C., Kagan, J., & Hewitt, J. K Early childhoodheart rate does not predict externalizing behavior problems at age 7 years. Journal of theAmerican Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, . (2000);39:1238   1244.[PubMed: 11026177]104. Wadsworth, M Delinquency, pulse rates and early emotional deprivation. BritishJournal of Criminology, . (1976);16:245   255.105. Wasserman, G. A. & Miller, L. SThe prevention of serious and violent juvenileoffending. In R. Loeber & D. P. Farrington (Eds.), Serious and violent juvenileoffenders: Risk factors and successful interventions (pp. 197-247). Thousand Oaks, CA:Sage Publications. (1998).106. Werner, E. E High-risk children in young adulthood: A longitudinal study from birth to32 years. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, . (1989);59:72   81. [PubMed: 2467566]107. Werner, E. E. & Smith, R. S(1992). Overcoming the odds: High risk children from birthto adulthood. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.108. Werner, E. E. & Smith, R. S(1982). Vulnerable but invincible: A longitudinal study ofresilient children and youth. New York: McGraw-Hill.109. Widom, C. S Child abuse and later effects. National Institute of Justice Journal, .(2000);242:3   9.110. Widom, C. S Avoidance of criminality in abused and neglected children. Psychiatry, .(1991);54:162   174. [PubMed: 1852849]111. Widom, C. S Child abuse, neglect, and violent criminal behavior. Criminology, .(1989);27:251   271.112. Widom, C. S. & Ames, M. A Criminal consequences of childhood sexual victimization.Child Abuse & Neglect, . (1994);18:303   318. [PubMed: 8187016]113. Williams, J. H. Ayers, C. D., Abbott, R. D., Hawkins, J. D., & Catalano, R. F Racialdifferences in risk factors for delinquency and substance use among adolescents. SocialWork Research, . (1999);23:241   256.114. Wilson, W. J(1987). The truly disadvantaged: The inner city, the underclass and publicpolicy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.115. Zingraff, M. T., Leiter, J., Johnson, M. C., & Myers, K. A The mediating effects of goodschool performance on the maltreatment-delinquency relationship. Journal of Researchin Crime and Delinquency, . (1994);31:62   91.116. Zingraff, M. T. Leiter, J., Myers, K. A., & Johnson, M. C Child maltreatment andyouthful problem behavior. Criminology, . (1993);31:173   202.Appendix 4-Alipsey and Derzon's Classes of Risk Factors
Antisocial BehaviorPhysical Violence    Violence, physical    Violence, recidivismAggression    Aggressive and disruptive behavior    Aggression, cannot tell    Aggression toward objects    Verbal aggressionPerson crimes    Crimes against persons    Sexual offenses    Violence, mixedGeneral offenses    Crime, index/serious    Crimes, mixed    Property crimes    Recidivism    Status offensesProblem behavior    Aggressively inclined    Antiestablishment    Antisocial behavior    Poor behavior rating    Problem behavior    Temper tantrums    Undesirable temperamentSubstance use  Illicit drug use    Alcohol use    Tobacco use
Personal CharacteristicsGender    Male genderEthnicity    Minority raceIQ    Learning problems  Low IQ  Low IQ, nonverbal  Low IQ, verbal  Low language abilityMedical/physical    Developmental history    Medical conditions    Medical examinations    Physical developmentSchool attitude/performance    Dropped out from school  Low interest in education  Low school achievement    Poor-quality school    TruancyPsychological condition    Behavior characteristics    High activity level    High daring    Impulsiveness    Poor eating habits      Psychopathology  Short attention spanFamily Characteristics
Antisocial parents    Criminal parent  Parent psychopathology  Parent violentAbusive parents    Child emotional abuse    Maltreated as child    Neglected as child    Physically abused as child    Sexually abused as childBroken home    Broken home    Separated from parentsParent-child relations    Discipline, mixed    Discipline, punitive  Low parent involvement  Low supervision  Low warmth    Negative attitude to child    Poor parent-child relations    Poor parental practices    Severity in child trainingSocioeconomic status  Low SES, family  Low SES, juvenile    Low-quality neighborhood    Low-status job, parents  Not employed, juvenileOther family characteristics  Parent background
    High family stress    Large family size    Marital discord    SocialSocial ties  Few social activities  Low popularityAntisocial peers    Antisocial peers  Peer criminality  Peer normlessnessAppendix 4-B Violence in the Media and Its Effect on Youth ViolenceAmericans have been concerned about the prevalence of violence in the media and its potentialharm to children and adolescents for at least 40 years. The body of research on televisionviolence has grown tremendously since the first major Federal reports on the subject in 1972 and1982 (National Institute of Mental Health, 1982; U.S. Surgeon General's Scientific AdvisoryCommittee on Television and Social Behavior, 1972). During this period, new media emerged --video games, cable television, music videos, and the Internet. As they gained popularity, thesemedia, along with television, prompted public concern and research attention.Recent surveys depict the abundance of (primarily electronic) media in U.S. homes (Roberts etal., 1999; Woodard, 1998) and the extensive presence of violence within the media landscape(Wilson et al., 1997, 1998). They also show that the proliferation of new media has expanded theopportunities for children to be exposed to media violence at home. Current psychological theorysuggests that the interactive nature of many of these new media may affect children's behaviormore powerfully than passive media such as television. Research to test this assumption is notyet well developed, and accurate measurement is needed to determine how much violencechildren are actually exposed to through various media -- and how patterns of exposure varyamong American youths.In reading this discussion of research on the impact of media violence on America's youth, a fewmajor points should be kept in mind:First, research on the effects of media violence examines many kinds of outcomes inyoung people. Researchers have focused primarily on aggression, an outcome thatpsychologists define as any behavior, physical or verbal, that is intended to harmanother person. Physical aggression may range from less serious acts, such as pushingor shoving, to more serious physical contact and fighting, to very serious violent actsthat carry a significant risk of injury or death, such as assault, robbery, rape, andhomicide. Some studies have focused on how media violence affects aggressivethinking, including beliefs and attitudes. Other studies have focused on the effects of
media violence on aggressive emotions -- that is, on emotional reactions, such as anger,that are related to aggressive behavior. In this discussion, the label "violence" is reservedfor the most extreme end of the physical aggression spectrum.Second, as noted in Chapter 4, the preponderance of evidence indicates that violentbehavior seldom results from a single cause; rather, multiple factors converging overtime contribute to such behavior. Accordingly, the influence of the mass media, howeverstrong or weak, is best viewed as one of the many potential factors that help to shapebehavior, including violent behavior.Third, a developmental perspective is essential for understanding how media violenceaffects youth behavior and for framing any coherent public health response to it.Although this report focuses generally on the violent behavior of adolescents, it iscritical to understand how children are influenced by and respond to media violence,especially in order to recognize and help those who are particularly susceptible toadverse effects. Most youths who are aggressive and engage in some forms of antisocialbehavior do not become violent teens and adults. However, it is well established thatmany violent adolescents and adults were highly aggressive and even violent at youngerages, and the highly aggressive child is at increased risk of growing up to be a moreaggressive young adult (Nagin & Tremblay, 1999). Because influences that promoteaggressive behavior in some young children can contribute to increasingly aggressiveand even violent behavior many years later, it is important to understand the earlyfactors that may play a role in later outcomes.Fourth, a growing body of research supports theories that explain how exposure tomedia violence would activate aggressive behaviors or attitudes in some children.Humans begin imitating other individuals at a very early age, and young children learnmany motor and social skills by observing the behavior of others (Bandura, 1977).Social interactions shape the scripts for behavior that children acquire, but observationallearning is a powerful mechanism for acquiring social scripts throughout childhood(Huesmann, 1998). Most researchers agree that such observational learning is probablythe major psychological process underlying the effects of media violence on aggressivebehavior. This same process could explain how prosocial behavior depicted in the mediamight encourage positive behavior in children (Friedlander, 1993; Harold, 1986; Mares,1996).Media Violence: Exposure and ContentAmerican children and youths spend, on average, more than 4 hours a day with television,computers, videotaped movies, and video games (Roberts et al., 1999; Woodard, 2000). But theirexposure to media varies considerably, depending on their age, parental viewing habits, andfamily socioeconomic status (SES). Most systematic research on children's exposure to violentmedia dates back to the 1970s, when most families did not have access to cable television, musicvideos, video games, or the Internet. As noted earlier, very few contemporary studiessystematically document children's actual consumption of violent media; this is particularly truefor the newer media.Several content analyses over the last 30 years have systematically examined violence on
television (Gerbner et al., 1980; Potter et al., 1995; Signorielli, 1990). The largest and mostrecent of these was the National Television Violence Survey (NTVS) (Wilson et al., 1997,11998), which examined the amount and content of violence on American television for three2consecutive years, as well as contextual variables that may make it more likely for aggressionand violence to be accepted, learned, and imitated. Smith and Donnerstein (1998) report thefollowing NTVS findings:61 percent of television programs contain some violence, and only 4 percent oftelevision programs with violent content feature an "antiviolence" theme.44 percent of the violent interactions on television involve perpetrators who have someattractive qualities worthy of emulation.43 percent of violent scenes involve humor either directed at the violence or used bycharacters involved with violence.Nearly 75 percent of violent scenes on television feature no immediate punishment foror condemnation of violence.40 percent of programs feature "bad" characters who are never or rarely punished fortheir aggressive actions.The NTVS report notes that many television programs fail to depict the harmful consequences ofviolence. Specifically, it finds that of all violent behavioral interactions on television, 58 percentdepict no pain, 47 percent depict no harm, and 40 percent depict harm unrealistically. Of allviolent scenes on television, 86 percent feature no blood or gore. Only 16 percent of violentprograms feature the long-term, realistic consequences of violence.Major Behavioral Effects of Media ViolenceBecause an exhaustive description of the research literature is not possible within this briefdiscussion, findings from meta-analyses are reported where available. In meta-analyses, the3results of multiple studies are combined and compared systematically and an overall effect sizecomputed. These analyses include findings from randomized experiments that look at aggressionimmediately after viewing violence, as well as cross-sectional surveys that provide a snapshot ofthe relationship between viewing violence and behavior at a fixed point in time. Also presentedare findings from longitudinal studies that examine whether exposure to media violence affectsviolence and aggression over time.Television and Film ViolenceMany anecdotal reports have described instances in which television and film violence led toimmediate violent behavior in individual children, but scientific studies of this relationship drawa more complex and qualified picture. Most of the relevant research has focused on howwatching dramatic violence on television and film affects aggressive thoughts and emotions, aswell as aggressive behavior. Some important studies address violence as well.Experimental StudiesA substantial number of laboratory and field experiments over the past half-century haveexamined whether children exposed to violent behavior on film or television behave more
aggressively immediately afterwards (see reviews by Bushman & Huesmann, 2000; Comstock &Scharrer, 1999; Geen, 1990; Geen & Thomas, 1986; Huesmann et al., 1997). Many studies havealso examined the immediate effect of media violence on aggressive thoughts or emotions (Rule& Ferguson, 1986), which have been shown to increase the risk of aggressive behavior (Dodge &Frame, 1982; Huesmann & Guerra, 1997).The most recent and comprehensive meta-analysis of media violence was conducted by Paik andComstock (1994), who examined effect sizes from 217 empirical studies on media violence andaggressive and violent behavior published between 1957 and 1990. The analysis indicates clearlythat brief exposure to violent dramatic presentations on television or in films causes short-termincreases in the aggressive behavior of youths, including physically aggressive behavior. Acrossall the randomized experiments, the unweighted average effect size was large (r = .37). When4only experiments examining physical aggression as the outcome were examined, the effect sizewas also large (r = .32).Although the experimental methods used in these studies enable researchers to test causalitymore readily than other research methods as noted by Comstock and Paik (1991), the findingsmay not necessarily apply to all real-world settings. Because experiments are narrowly focusedon testing specific causal hypotheses, they do not examine the effects of all factors that might bepresent in more realistic situations. This means that some real-world influences might actuallylessen or even eliminate the aggressive reactions observed in experiments. For example, whiletelevision, film, and other media contain a variety of antisocial and other messages, mostlaboratory studies to date have exposed study participants primarily to violent materials. Inaddition, participants may react differently in the laboratory when they realize that theirexpressions of aggression will not be punished (Gunter, 1983). Any summary of theseexperimental results should also acknowledge the argument raised by some critics (such asFreedman, 1992) that many study participants provide the responses they believe the researcherwants. Despite these limitations, laboratory experiments are important because they allowresearchers to isolate the unique effect of exposure to violence on subsequent behavior.An important general finding from these experimental studies is that not all youths seem to beaffected equally by media violence. Effects seem to be strongest on youths who are predisposedto be aggressive for some reason or who have been aroused or provoked (Berkowitz, 1993;Bushman, 1995; Geen & O'Neal, 1969).Cross-Sectional SurveysCross-sectional surveys over the past 40 years have generally focused on establishing a linkbetween the current aggressiveness of children and the amount of television and film violencethey watch regularly (see reviews by Bushman & Huesmann, 2000; Chaffee, 1972; Comstock &Scharrer, 1999; Eysenck & Nias, 1978; Huesmann & Miller, 1994).Paik and Comstock's meta-analysis (1994) indicates that in cross-sectional surveys viewingmedia violence was positively correlated with various measures of aggression. They reportedsmall to moderate effect sizes across all measures of aggression (r = .19) and for physicalaggression alone (r = .20). For the outcome of most concern to this report -- criminal violenceagainst a person -- the effect size was small (r = .06). These results suggest that the link betweenmedia violence and aggressive behavior found in laboratory studies may also hold for behaviors
outside the laboratory. However, cross-sectional surveys do not by themselves indicate whethermedia violence is causing aggression, whether aggressive youths are attracted to media violence,or whether some other factor is predisposing some youths to watch more violence and behavemore aggressively.Longitudinal StudiesLong-term studies in which exposure to media violence in early childhood is related to lateraggression and violence (such as aggravated assault, robbery, rape, and homicide) can identifythe enduring effects of media violence. In most such studies to date, however, aggression, notviolence, has been the primary outcome measured. In the absence of a meta-analysis, the findingsof three frequently cited longitudinal studies on the effects of media violence are discussedbriefly below. Studies examining effects over shorter time periods (Singer et al., 1984) or withinternational samples (Huesmann & Eron, 1986) are not included here.In a study begun in 1960 on a sample of 875 youths in New York State, Eron and colleaguesfound that for boys, but not for girls, exposure to media violence at age 8 was significantlyrelated to aggressive behavior a decade later (r = .31, N = 211, p < .01) (Eron et al., 1972;Lefkowitz et al., 1977). At both times, peers assessed physical and verbal aggression. Thelongitudinal correlation remained above .25, even in separate analyses statistically controlling forfactors such as the child's initial aggressiveness, the child's intelligence, family SES, parents'aggressiveness, and parents' punishment and nurturance of the child.Milavsky et al. (1982) examined the probability of initiating aggression after exposure toviolence on television in 2,400 boys and girls age 7 to 12 from two midwestern cities who hadbeen surveyed up to six times between 1970 and 1973. A sample of 800 teenage boys was5studied at five times to identify the effect of violent television on aggression and violence. Forthe elementary school sample, the average cross-sectional correlation between exposure to mediaviolence and personal aggression was small for boys (r = .17) and large for girls (r = .30). Theresearchers then attempted to predict aggressive behavior at one point in time from the extent towhich children viewed television violence at an earlier time, while controlling for earlieraggressive characteristics. They examined this prediction over 15 time intervals ranging from 5months to 3 years apart. For elementary school boys, only 2 of the 15 predictions at differentintervals were statistically significant. For girls, only three predictions were statisticallysignificant. In the teenage male sample, only one of eight correlations was significant. In onlyone of nine analyses using measures of violence (for example, knife fight, car theft, mugging,gang fight) were boys with greater exposure to television violence more likely to initiate violence2 years later than those with less exposure.The third longitudinal study of media violence effects began in the late 1970s and spanned fivecountries (Huesmann et al., (submitted); Huesmann et al., 1984; Huesmann & Eron, 1986). Ineach locale, samples of middle-class youths were examined three times between age 6 to 8 or age8 to 11. Both physical and verbal aggression were assessed by peers. The correlations betweenaggression and overall viewing of television violence at a single point in time were small tomoderate and often significant. In the United States, the 3-year average correlation was moderatefor boys and for girls (r = .25 and r = .29, respectively; p< .001). The predictive power ofviewing television violence for childhood aggression a year later varied substantially. In theUnited States, girls' viewing of television violence had a significant effect (   = .17, N = 89, p <
.05) on their later aggression, even after accounting for early levels of aggression, SES, andscholastic achievement. For boys, television violence alone did not predict later aggression.When the investigators took into account both exposure to television violence and identificationwith aggressive television characters, they found a positive relation with aggressiveness (   = .19,N = 84, p < .05).A follow-up study of over 300 people in the U.S. sample 15 years later suggested that mediaviolence has a delayed effect on aggression (Huesmann et al., (submitted)). There was a small tomoderate longitudinal correlation between childhood television viewing and a compositemeasure of young adult aggression (physical, verbal, and indirect aggression) for both men (r =.21, N = 153, p < .01) and women (r = .19, N = 176, p < .01). When the outcome was limited tophysical aggression, the correlations were smaller (r = .17 and r = .15, respectively).Furthermore, women who had watched relatively more television violence as girls committedsignificantly more specific acts of violence as adults, such as "punching, beating, or chokinganother adult," than did the other women (17 percent versus 4 percent). There were no significantdifferences among the men. Other analyses showed that effects remained significant even whenresearchers controlled for parent education and children's scholastic achievement (   = .19 forboys,    = .17 for girls, p < .05). In addition, aggressive behavior did not significantly increaseboys' or girls' viewing of television violence (   = .08 for boys and    = .04 for girls; p = ns).In summary, these longitudinal studies show a small, but often statistically significant, long-termrelationship between viewing television violence in childhood and later aggression, especially inlate adolescence and early adulthood. Some evidence suggests that more aggressive childrenwatch more violence, but the evidence is stronger that watching media violence is a precursor ofincreased aggression.Other StudiesOther studies have explored the behavioral impact of introducing television in several countries(Centerwall, 1989a, 1989b, 1992; Joy et al., 1986; Williams, 1986). These studies indicate thatwhen television was introduced, aggression and violence increased. The findings must be viewedwith caution, however, because they do not take into account a range of other factors that mayinfluence national crime rates and the amount of violence watched on television.Despite anecdotal reports of a "contagion of violence," relatively little systematic research hasexamined whether seeing or hearing about violence in news coverage encourages violent oraggressive behavior. On the whole, the limited data available support the notion of a contagioneffect. This evidence is derived from studies examining how reports of a well-known person'ssuicide affect the likelihood of imitative suicide (Phillips, 1979, 1982; Simon, 1979; Stack,1989). Other studies of the contagion effect (Berkowitz & Macaulay, 1971; Phillips, 1983) havebeen questioned because of their research methods and the ambiguity of their results (Baron &Reiss, 1985; see Phillips & Bollen, 1985 for a response). This area merits additional research.Violence in Other MediaInternetTheoretically, the effects of exposure to media violence extend to Internet media as well. To date,however, no studies have been published regarding the effects of Web-based media violence on
youth aggression and violence.Music VideosA relatively small amount of research has focused on the impact of music videos with violent orantisocial themes (Baxter et al., 1985; Caplan, 1985; Hansen & Hansen, 1990; Johnson et al.,1995a, 1995b; Rich et al., 1998). Randomized experiments indicate that exposure to violent orantisocial rap videos can increase aggressive thinking, but no research has yet tested how suchexposure directly affects physical aggression.Video GamesThe impact of video games containing violence has recently become a focus of research becausechildren are theoretically more susceptible to behavioral influences when they are activeparticipants than when they are observers. To date, violent video games have not been studied asextensively as violent television or movies. The number of studies investigating the impact ofsuch games on youth aggression is small, there have been none on serious violence, and none hasbeen longitudinal.A recent meta-analysis of these studies found that the overall effect size for both randomized andcorrelational studies was small for physical aggression (r = .19) and moderate for aggressivethinking (r = .27) (Anderson & Bushman, in press). In separate analyses, the effect sizes for bothrandomized and cross-sectional studies was small (r = .18 and .19, respectively). The impact ofvideo games on violent behavior remains to be determined.Potential Moderators of Behavioral EffectsResearch suggests that not all youths are affected in the same way by viewing media violence.Factors that appear to influence the effects of media violence on aggressive or violent behaviorinclude characteristics of the viewer (such as age, intelligence, aggressiveness, and whether thechild perceives the media as realistic and identifies with aggressive characters) and his or hersocial environment (for example, parental influences), as well as aspects of media content(including characteristics of perpetrators, degree of realism and justification for violence, anddepiction of consequences of violence).Evidence that these factors moderate the influence of media violence is limited, and it is morerelevant to aggression than to violence. For example, studies of responses to violent televisionand films and violent video games have found that people who were initially more aggressivethan other subjects were more affected in behavior, thoughts, and emotions (Anderson & Dill,2000; Bushman, 1995; Bushman & Geen, 1990; Friedrich & Stein, 1973; Josephson, 1987).Research in this area clearly suggests that the impact of violent television, film, and video gameson aggression is moderated by viewers' aggressive characteristics.Evidence that other individual, environmental, and content factors moderate the effects ofexposure to media violence is less clear. Some studies suggest that these factors may buffer orenhance effects, but few have tested for such influences. Although limited in scope and depth,such studies provide clues to potential avenues for prevention efforts. For example, preliminarydata point to the potentially vital role of parents in supervising their children's exposure toviolent media and in helping them interpret it (Nathanson, 1999).
Summary of Major Empirical Research FindingsA substantial body of research now indicates that exposure to media violence increases children'sphysically and verbally aggressive behavior in the short term (within hours to days of exposure).Media violence also increases aggressive attitudes and emotions, which are theoretically linkedto aggressive and violent behavior. Findings from a smaller body of longitudinal studies suggesta small but statistically significant impact on aggression over many years. The evidence for long-term effects on violence is inconsistent.Based on the findings of studies reported here, the average effect sizes of exposure to mediaviolence on various measures of aggression range from small (r = .15) to quite large (r = .64).The evidence that exposure to media violence is a risk factor for violent behavior is more limited,with small average effect sizes of r = .06 in cross-sectional surveys, r = .13 in experimentalstudies (Paik & Comstock, 1994), and r = .00 to .22 in longitudinal studies (Huesmann et al.,(submitted); Milavsky et al., 1982). Taken together, findings to date suggest that media violencehas a relatively small impact on violence. The effect on aggression is stronger, ranging fromsmall to moderate.Although there is clear scientific evidence of a correlation between exposure to media violenceand some violent behaviors, randomized experiments -- the research methodology best suited todetermining causality -- cannot ethically be used in studies of violent behavior. Thus, the causallinks between media violence and behavior are more firmly established for aggressive behaviorthan for violent behavior. Longitudinal studies, which also provide some insights into this issue,have linked repeated exposure to media violence in the early years with an increased likelihoodof aggressive behavior in the teen and adult years. However, few of these studies have reportedon violence as an outcome. Moreover, the violent behaviors that are the focus of this report(homicide, forcible rape, aggravated assault, and robbery) occur infrequently and are subject tomultiple influences. At present, it is extremely difficult to distinguish between the relativelysmall, long-term effects of media exposure and those other influences.In sum, a diverse body of research provides strong evidence that exposure to violence in themedia can increase children's aggressive behavior in the short term. Some studies suggest thatlong-term effects exist, and there are strong theoretical reasons why this is the case. But manyquestions remain regarding the short- and long-term effects of media violence, especially onviolent behavior. Despite considerable advances in research, it is not yet possible to describeaccurately how much exposure, of what types, for how long, at what ages, for what types ofchildren, or in what types of settings will predict violent behavior in adolescents and adults.Preventive EffortsEfforts to reduce the presumed harmful effects of media violence on youths have taken variousforms, including:Attempting to reduce the amount of media violence and children's access to it (forexample, calls for media self-regulation and violence ratings);Encouraging and facilitating parental monitoring of children's access to media (forexample, V-chip legislation and advisory labels on music and video games);Educating parents and children about the potential dangers of media violence (for
example, media and empathy educational programs); andTargeting children's views about violence to reduce the chances that they will imitate theviolence they see (Corder-Bolz, 1980; Hicks, 1968; Huesmann et al., 1983; Linz et al.,1990; Nathanson, 1999).From a public health perspective, this preventive domain is largely uncharted territory. Fewpreventive efforts have been studied systematically. Furthermore, not enough research has beendone to form a basis for the design of many experimental interventions. As noted in other partsof this report, an extensive body of scientific research undergirds our emerging knowledge abouteffective ways of preventing youth violence. Although many violence prevention programsaddress a complex array of risk and protective factors in the lives of young people, they have notyet addressed the role of the media. This gap needs to be filled.ImplicationsResearch to date justifies sustained efforts to curb the adverse effects of media violence onyouths. Although our knowledge is incomplete, it is sufficient to develop a coherent publichealth approach to violence prevention that builds upon what is known, even as more research isunder way. Unlike earlier Federal research reports on media violence and youth (NationalInstitute of Mental Health, 1982; U.S. Surgeon General's Scientific Advisory Committee onTelevision and Social Behavior, 1972), this discussion takes place within a broader examinationof the causes and prevention of youth violence. This context is vital. It permits media violence tobe regarded as one of many complex influences on the behavior of America's children and youngpeople. It also suggests that multilayered solutions are needed to address aggressive and violentbehavior.A variety of media violence is present in the homes of young children, with considerablevariation in the degree of parental supervision (Woodard, 1998). Regardless of government andother interested groups' attempts to limit the amount of violence reaching American families,families themselves play a critical role in guiding what reaches their children. Whether byadopting V-chip technology for home television programming, by using Internet violencescreening, or simply by monitoring closely children's use of televisions, computers, and videogames, parents can limit and shape their children's selection of, interaction with, and response tomedia violence. Community groups -- including schools, faith-based organizations, and ParentTeacher Associations -- can teach parents and children how to be more critical consumers ofmedia. Federal agencies can be more active in encouraging needed research, in sharing researchfindings with the public, in encouraging increased interaction between violence preventionresearchers and media researchers, and in creating networks for sharing solutions to social andpublic health problems.References1. Anderson, C. A., & Bushman, B. J (in press) Effects of violent video games onaggressive behavior, aggressive cognition, aggressive affect, physiological arousal, andprosocial behavior: A meta-analytic review of scientific literature. PsychologicalScience .2. Anderson, C. A., & Dill, K. E Video games and aggressive thoughts, feelings, andbehavior in the laboratory and in life. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, .
(2000);78:772   790. [PubMed: 10794380]3. Bandura, A Social learning theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. (1977).4. Baron, J. N., & Reiss, P. C Same time, next year: Aggregate analyses of the mass mediaand violent behavior. American Sociological Review, . (1985);50:347   363.5. Baxter, R. L., De Riemer, C., Landini, A., Leslie, L., & Singletary, M. W A contentanalysis of music videos. Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic Media, .(1985);29:333   340.6. Berkowitz, L Pain and aggression: Some findings and implications. Motivation andEmotion, . (1993);17:277   293.7. Berkowitz, L., & Macaulay, J The contagion of criminal violence. Sociometry, .(1971);34:238   260.8. Bushman, B. J Moderating role of trait aggressiveness in the effects of violent media onaggression. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, . (1995);69:950   960.[PubMed: 7473040]9. Bushman, B. J., & Geen, R. G Role of cognitive-emotional mediators and individualdifferences in the effects of media violence on aggression. Journal of Personality andSocial Psychology, . (1990);58:156   163. [PubMed: 2308072]10. Bushman, B. J., & Huesmann, L. REffects of televised violence on aggression. In D. G.Singer & J. L. Singer (Eds.), Handbook of children and the media (pp. 223-254).Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. (2000).11. Caplan, R. E Violent program content in music video. Journalism Quarterly, .(1985);62:144   147.12. Centerwall, B. S Television and violence. The scale of the problem and where to gofrom here. Journal of the American Medical Association, . (1992);267:3059   3063.[PubMed: 1588720]13. Centerwall, B. S Exposure to television as a cause of violence. Public Communicationand Behavior, . (1989a);2:1   58.14. Centerwall, B. S Exposure to television as a risk factor for violence. American Journalof Epidemiology, . (1989b);129:643   652. [PubMed: 2923115]15. Chaffee, S. HTelevision and adolescent aggressiveness (overview). In G. A. Comstock& E. A. Rubinstein (Eds.), Television and social behavior: A technical report to theSurgeon General's Scientific Advisory Committee on Television and Social Behavior.Vol. 3. Television and adolescent aggressiveness (DHEW Publication No. HSM 72-9058) (pp. 1-34). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. (1972).16. Comstock, G., & Paik, H. J(1991). Television and the American child. New York:Academic Press.17. Comstock, G., & Scharrer, E(1999). Television: What's on, who's watching, and what itmeans. New York: Academic Press.18. Corder-Bolz, C. R Mediation: The role of significant others. Journal of Communication,. (1980);30:106   118.19. Dodge, K. A., & Frame, C. L Social cognitive biases and deficits in aggressive boys.Child Development, . (1982);53:620   635. [PubMed: 7094675]20. Eron, L. D., Huesmann, L. R., Lefkowitz, M. M., & Walder, L. O Does televisionviolence cause aggression? American Psychologist, . (1972);27:253   263. [PubMed:5015586]21. Eysenck, H. J., & Nias, D. K(1978). Sex, violence, and the media. New York: Saint
Martin's Press.22. Freedman, J. LTelevision violence and aggression: What psychologists should tell thepublic. In P. Suedfeld & P. Tetlock (Eds.), Psychology and social policy (pp. 179-189).New York: Hemisphere Publishing. (1992).23. Friedlander, B. Z Community violence, children's development, and mass media: Inpursuit of new insights, new goals, and new strategies. Psychiatry, . (1993);56:66   81.[PubMed: 8488214]24. Friedrich, L. K., & Stein, A. H Aggressive and prosocial television programs and thenatural behavior of preschool children. Monographs of the Society for Research in ChildDevelopment, . (1973);38:1   64. [PubMed: 4756996]25. Geen, R. G The influence of the mass media. In R. G. Geen (Ed.), Human aggression(Mapping Social Psychology Series) (pp. 83-112). Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/ColePublishing. (1990).26. Geen, R. G., & O'Neal, E. C Activation of cue-elicited aggression by general arousal.Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, . (1969);11:289   292. [PubMed:5784269]27. Geen, R. G., & Thomas, S. L The immediate effects of media violence on behavior.Journal of Social Issues, . (1986);42:7   27.28. Gerbner, G., Gross, L., Morgan, M., & Signorielli, N The "mainstreaming" of America:Violence profile no. 11. Journal of Communication, . (1980):10   29.29. Gunter, B Do aggressive people prefer violent television? Bulletin of the BritishPsychological Society, . (1983);36:166   168.30. Hansen, C. H., & Hansen, R. D Rock music videos and antisocial behavior. Basic andApplied Social Psychology, . (1990);11:357   369.31. Harold, S A synthesis of 1043 effects of television on social behavior. PublicCommunication and Behavior, . (1986);1:65   133.32. Hicks, D. J Effects of co-observer's sanctions and adult presence on imitativeaggression. Child Development, . (1968);39:303   309. [PubMed: 5645805]33. Huesmann, L. R(1998). The role of social information processing and cognitive schemain the acquisition and maintenance of habitual aggressive behavior. In R. G. Geen & E.Donnerstein (Eds.), Human aggression: Theories, research, and implications for socialpolicy (pp. 73-109). New York: Academic Press.34. Huesmann, L. R., & Eron, L. D Television and the aggressive child: A cross-nationalcomparison. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. (1986).35. Huesmann, L. R., Eron, L. D., Klein, R., Brice, P., & Fisher, P Mitigating the imitationof aggressive behaviors by changing children's attitudes about media violence. Journalof Personality and Social Psychology, . (1983);44:899   910. [PubMed: 6864445]36. Huesmann, L. R., & Guerra, N. G Children's normative beliefs about aggression andaggressive behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, . (1997);72:408   419. [PubMed: 9107008]37. Huesmann, L. R., Lagerspetz, K., & Eron, L. D Intervening variables in the TVviolence-aggression relation: Evidence from two countries. Developmental Psychology, .(1984);20:746   775.38. Huesmann, L. R., & Miller, L. S(1994). Long-term effects of repeated exposure tomedia violence in childhood. In L. R. Huesmann (Ed.), Aggressive behavior: Currentperspectives (pp. 153-183). New York: Plenum Press.
39. Huesmann, L. R., Moise, J. F., & Podolski, C. L(1997). The effects of media violence onthe development of antisocial behavior. In D. M. Stoff, J. Breiling, & J. D. Maser (Eds.),Handbook of antisocial behavior (pp. 181-193). New York: John Wiley.40. Huesmann, L. R., Moise, J., Podolski, C. L., & Eron, L(submitted). Longitudinalrelations between children's exposure to television violence and their later aggressiveand violent behavior in young adulthood: 1977-1992. [PubMed: 12661882]41. Johnson, J. D., Adams, M. S., Ashburn, L., & Reed, W Differential gender effects ofexposure to rap music on African American adolescents' acceptance of teen datingviolence. Sex Roles, . (1995a);33:597   605.42. Johnson, J. D., Jackson, L. A., & Gatto, L Violent attitudes and deferred academicaspirations: Deleterious effects of exposure to rap music. Basic and Applied SocialPsychology, . (1995b);16:27   41.43. Josephson, W. L Television violence and children's aggression: Testing the priming,social script, and disinhibition predictions. Journal of Personality and SocialPsychology, . (1987);53:882   890. [PubMed: 3681656]44. Joy, L. A., Kimball, M. M., & Zabrack, M. L(1986). Television and children'saggressive behavior. In T. M. Williams (Ed.), The impact of television: A naturalexperiment in three communities (pp. 303-360). New York: Academic Press.45. Lefkowitz, M. M., Eron, L. D., Walder, L. O., & Huesmann, L. R(1977). Growing up tobe violent: A longitudinal study of the development of aggression. New York: PergamonPress.46. Linz, D., Fuson, I. A., & Donnerstein, E Mitigating the negative effects of sexuallyviolent mass communications through pre-exposure briefings. CommunicationResearch, . (1990);17:641   674.47. Mares, M. L Positive effects of television on social behavior: A meta-analysis(Annenberg Public Policy Center Report Series, No. 3). Philadelphia: Annenberg PublicPolicy Center. [Also available on the World Wide Web:http://www.appcpenn.org/pubs.htm] (1996).48. Milavsky, J. R., Kessler, R., Stipp, H., Rubens, W. S., Pearl, D., Bouthilet, L., & Lazar,J(Eds.) Television and behavior: Ten years of scientific progress and implications for theeighties. Vol. 2: Technical reviews (DHHS Publication No. ADM 82-1196s).Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. (1982).49. Nagin, D., & Tremblay, R. E Trajectories of boys' physical aggression, opposition, andhyperactivity on the path to physically violent and nonviolent juvenile delinquency.Child Development, . (1999);70:1181   1196. [PubMed: 10546339]50. Nathanson, A. I Identifying and explaining the relationship between parental mediationand children's aggression. Communication Research, . (1999);26:124   143.51. Television and behavior: Ten years of scientific progress and implications for theeighties: Vol. 1. Summary report (DHHS Publication No. ADM 82-1195). Washington,DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. (1982).52. Paik, H., & Comstock, G The effects of television violence on antisocial behavior: Ameta-analysis. Communication Research, . (1994);21:516   546.53. Phillips, D. P The impact of mass media violence on U.S. homicides. AmericanSociological Review, . (1983);48:560   568.54. Phillips, D. P The impact of fictional television stories on U.S. adult fatalities: Newevidence on the effect of the mass media on violence. American Journal of Sociology, .
(1982);87:1340   1359. [PubMed: 7149089]55. Phillips, D. P Suicide, motor vehicle fatalities, and the mass media: Evidence toward atheory of suggestion. American Journal of Sociology, . (1979);84:1150   1174. [PubMed:507276]56. Phillips, D. P., & Bollen, K. A Same time, last year: Selective data dredging for negativefindings. American Sociological Review, . (1985);50:364   371.57. Potter, W. J., Vaughan, M. W., Warren, R., Howley, K., Land, A., & Hagemeyer, J. CHow real is the portrayal of aggression in television entertainment programming?Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic Media, . (1995);39:496   516.58. Rich, M., Woods, E. R., Goodman, E., Emans, S. J., & DuRant, R. H Aggressors orvictims: Gender and race in music video violence. Pediatrics, . (1998);101:669   674.[PubMed: 9521954]59. Roberts, D. F., Foehr, U. G., Rideout, V. J., & Vrodie, M Kids & media @ the newmillennium. Menlo Park, CA: Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. (1999).60. Rule, B. G., & Ferguson, T. J The effects of media violence on attitudes, emotions, andcognitions. Journal of Social Issues, . (1986);42:29   50.61. Signorielli, NTelevision's mean and dangerous world: A continuation of the culturalindicators perspective. In N. Signorielli & M. Morgan (Eds.), Cultivation analysis: Newdirections in media effects research (pp. 85-106). Newbury Park, CA: SagePublications. (1990).62. Simon, A Violence in the mass media: A case of modeling. Perceptual and Motor Skills,. (1979);48:1081   1082. [PubMed: 492874]63. Singer, J. L., Singer, D. G., & Rapaczynski, W. S Family patterns and television viewingas predictors of children's beliefs and aggression. Journal of Communication, .(1984);34(2):73   89.64. Smith, S. L., & Donnerstein, E(1998). Harmful effects of exposure to media violence:Learning of aggression, emotional desensitization, and fear. In R. G. Geen & E.Donnerstein (Eds.), Human aggression: Theories, research, and implications for socialpolicy (pp. 167-202). New York: Academic Press.65. Stack, S The effect of publicized mass murders and murder-suicides on lethal violence,1968-1980: A research note. Social Psychiatry & Psychiatric Epidemiology, .(1989);24:202   208. [PubMed: 2502862]66. Television and growing up: The impact of televised violence (DHEW Publication No.HSM 72-9086). Washington, DC. (1972).67. Williams, T. M(1986). The impact of television: A natural experiment in threecommunities. New York: Academic Press.68. Wilson, B. J., Kunkel, D., Linz, D., Potter, J., Donnerstein, E., Smith, S. L., Blumenthal,E., & Gray, TViolence in television programming overall: University of California,Santa Barbara study. In M. Seawall (Ed.), National television violence study (Vol. 1, pp.3-184). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. (1997).69. Wilson, B. J., Kunkel, D., Linz, D., Potter, J., Donnerstein, E., Smith, S. L., Blumenthal,E., & Berry, MViolence in television programming overall: University of California,Santa Barbara study. In M. Seawall (Ed.), National television violence study (Vol. 2, pp.3-204). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. (1998).70. Woodard, E. H Media in the home 2000: The fourth annual survey of parents andchildren (Survey Series No. 7). Philadelphia, PA: The Annenberg Public Policy Center
of the University of Pennsylvania. (1998).71. Woodard, E. H., IV, & Gridina, N Media in the home 2000: The fifth annual survey ofparents and children. Available on the World Wide Web:http://www.appcpenn.org/inhome.pdf. (2000).Footnotes1If the relationship to violence is nonlinear, risk and protection may take on a different meaning. However,the conditions and characteristics identified as protective factors by those using the absence-of-riskconceptualization rarely, if ever, involve a nonlinear relationship to violence.2As noted in Chapter 3, most violent offenders commit many serious property offenses (such as burglary,auto theft, and larceny), and most youths involved in serious property offenses (FBI index offenses) are alsoinvolved in violent offenses. The risk factors described here are based on longitudinal studies that use self-reports to predict violent offenses. Several of the studies also include official arrest data and thus predictself-reported offenses, arrests for serious or violent offenses, or both.3Effect sizes for risk factors not included in the meta-analyses reported by Lipsey and Derzon (1988),Hawkins et al. (1998c), and Parik and Comstock (1994) are weighted (by sample size) mean correlations.The effect sizes in Parik and Comstock are unweighted mean correlations.4Numerous studies of these effects have been done, notably those of Robert Pynoos and colleagues. See, forexample, Pynoos, R. & Nader K. (1988). Psychological first aid for children who witness communityviolence. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 1, 445-473.5This is a different use of the term "risk marker" than that proposed by Kraemer et al. (1997). They use riskmarker to refer to a risk factor or cause (such as sex or race) that cannot, in practical terms, be changed byan intervention. This report focuses on its causal role rather than its amenability to change.6In another study, the relative risk of later violence was two to three times as great among abused children asnonabused children (Zingraff et al., 1993).7There is a fairly extensive body of research on protective factors in the field of psychopathology (Garmezy,1985; Rae-Grant et al., 1989; Rolf et al., 1993; Rutter, 1979, 1985; Rutter et al., 1979; Stattin et al., 1997;Werner and Smith, 1982, 1992). There are also a number of studies focusing on delinquency that purport toidentify protective factors (Brewer et al., 1995; Farrington and West, 1993; Hawkins et al., 1992; Resnick etal., 1997; Smith et al., 1995).1The NTVS randomly sampled programs from 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. on 23 broadcast and cable channelsover a 20-week period from October to June during the 1994 through 1997 viewing seasons. A sum of 119hours per channel, or 2,500 hours of television programming, was assessed each year.2The NTVS defined violence as "overt depiction of a credible threat of physical force, or the actual use ofsuch force intended to physically harm an animate being or group of beings." Content analyses of televisionprograms generally treat the program itself as the unit of analysis and exclude advertisements. "Violencealso includes certain depictions of physically harmful consequences against an animate being or group thatoccur as a result of unseen violent means. Thus, there are three primary types of violent depictions: crediblethreats, behavioral acts, and harmful consequences" (Smith & Donnerstein, 1998, p. 170).3In the text to follow, all reported results are statistically significant (p < .05).4In this study, all effects are unweighted average effects.***socially withdrawnbreak up with girlfriendsingle parent familyfamily income under $30,000.grades falling
5These predictions are based on subsamples from which many of the most aggressive children had beendropped by the research team, reportedly because they were not accurately describing their television viewing.Copyright NoticeBookshelf ID: NBK44293