verbal bullying, fighting, drug use, sexual harassment***School violence is youth violence that occurs on school property, on the way to or from schoolor school-sponsored events, or during a school- sponsored event. A young person can be a victim, a perpetrator, or a witness of school violence. School violence may also involve or impact adults. Youth violence includes various behaviors. Some violent acts—such as bullying, pushing, and shoving—can cause more emotional harm than physical harm. Other forms of violence, such as gang violence and assault (with or without weapons), can Fact Sheet School violence is youth violence that occurs on school property, on the way to or from schoolor school-sponsored events, or during a school- sponsored event. A young person can be a victim, a perpetrator, or a witness of school violence. School violence may also involve or impact adults. Youth violence includes various behaviors. Some violent acts—such as bullying, pushing, and shoving—can cause more emotional harm than physical harm. Other forms of violence, such as gang violence and assault (with or without weapons), can lead to serious injury or even death. To learn more about school violence and youth violence, please visit: www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention . Why is school violence a public health problem? School associated violent deaths are rare.1 * 31 homicides of school-age youth, ages 5 to 18 years, occurred at school during the 2012-2013 school year. * Of all youth homicides, less than 2.6% occur at school, and this percentage has been relatively stable for the past decade. In 2014, there were about 486,400 nonfatal violent victimizations at school among students 12 to 18 years of age.1 Approximately 9% of teachers report that they have been threatened with injury b A number of factors can increase the risk of a youth engaging in violence at school. However, the presence of these factors does not always mean that a young person will become an o ender. Risk factors for school and youth violence include: • Prior history of violence• Drug, alcohol, or tobacco use• Association with delinquent peers • Poor family functioning• Poor grades in school• Poverty in the community The goal is to stop school violence from happening in the rst place. Several prevention strategies have been identi ed. * Universal, school-based prevention programs can signi cantly lower rates of aggression and violent behavior.3 These programs are delivered to all students in a school or grade level. They teach about various topics and develop skills, such as emotional self- awareness and control, positive social skills, problem solving, ***break up with girlfriendsingle parent familyfamily income under $30,000.grades fallingfalling schoolbulliedgun owner family