gang activities, stealing, weapons use, making threats, intimidation, ostracizing, cyber bullying.***According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 7.4% of high school students in 2011 reported being threatened or harmed with a weapon on school grounds. The National Center for Education Statistics notes that between 1992 and 2009, there were between 14 and 34 homicides among children ages 5 to 18 at school each year. The CDC puts these levels of violence in statistical perspective: “Approximately 1% of all youth homicides in 2008-2009 occurred at school, and the percentage of all youth homicides occurring at school has been less than 2% since the 1992-1993 school year. There was approximately one homicide or suicide of a school-age youth at school per 2.7 million students enrolled during the 2009-2010 school year.” Further, the CDC notes that 5.4% of students “reported carrying a weapon (gun, knife or club) on school property on one or more days in the 30 the damage and loss of life in possible future attacks; these range from improving mental health care and implementing violence prevention curriculum to enhanced security and communication protocols. Preparation levels vary by setting, according to 2009-10 National Center for Education Statistics data: 58% of suburban schools perform safety drills according to a specified plan, compared with 49% of urban schools and 48% of rural schools.As researchers have noted, media outlets have sometimes overreacted to school shootings, bringing about what some scholars have called the construction of “moral panic” — an inflated sense of alarm over a perceived threatening trend. But it is unclear if school shootings can be sufficiently distinguished and defined from other violence in America. Hype and exaggeration may distract from formulating effective school policies, some commentators believe, even as horrifying incidents such as the school shootings in Littleton, Colo. and Newtown, Conn., trigger a national conversation about “cultures” of school violence. It is worth noting, too, that more mundane (and routine) forms of physical violence plague some schools, and non-gun related violence — such as the mass stabbings at Franklin Regional High School in Murrysville, Penn. — remains a significant issue.Below are studies and articles that bring a research perspective to these issues. For more information, see other research reviews on rampage violence, firearms-related violence, global comparisons of firearms and homicides and the relationship between violence and psychotic behavior. Additional useful resources include the Poynter Institute’s primer on what journalists should know about school shootings and guns, as well as the FBI’s list of resources on school violence.***does poorly in school frequently gets into fights with other children at school (uncontrollable anger, impulsive and chronic hitting, intimidating and bullying behavior) reacts to disappointments, criticism, or teasing with extreme and intense anger, blame, or revenge 