verbal bullying, fighting, drug use***School violence can be prevented. Research shows that prevention efforts Ð by teachers, administrators, parents, community members, and even students Ð can reduce violence and improve the overall school environment. No one factor in isolation causes school violence, so stopping school violence involves using multiple prevention strategies that address the many individual, relationship, community, and societal factors that influence the likelihood of violence. Prevention efforts should ultimately reduce risk factors and promote protective factors at these multiple levels of influence.Discussions about school violence rarely include public health's proven prevention approaches. Public health approaches focus on preventing violence before it starts and have been shown to effectively reduce school and youth violence. This known effectiveness stands in contrast to commonly used prevention strategies, such as metal detectors and other security measures, for which there is insufficient data to determine their benefits and some evidence to suggest that they may negatively impact students' perceptions of safety.1 Public health offers knowledge and experience in preventing school violence that can significantly enhance approaches to end school violence.Individual Level StrategiesYouth's experiences, knowledge, and skills can influence their likelihood of becoming involved in violence. Strengthening young people's abilities to effectively solve difficulties that arise and their opportunities to participate in prosocial activities can significantly reduce the risk for violence. One strategy for addressing these individual risks are universal, school-based violence prevention programs, which have been proven to reduce rates of aggression and violent behavior among students.2 These programs are delivered to all students in a school or a particular grade and focus on many areas, including emotional self-awareness, emotional control, self-esteem, positive social skills, social problem-solving, conflict resolution, and teamwork.Relationship Level StrategiesPositive relationships between students and their prosocial peers, teachers, and families can be critical assets in promoting youth's well-being and preventing school violence. Several strategies to enhance these relationships have been found to be effective in reducing violence.3 For instance, many universal, school-based violence prevention programs improve students' social skills and problem-solving abilities, which can result in more positive peer and student-teacher relationships throughout the school. Some school-based programs also help students know how to appropriately and safely intervene to stop an escalating violent episode between peers.Many school-based programs and policies are also effective in helping teachers build healthy relationships, model nonviolent attitudes and behaviors, and contribute to a broader positive school climate, which in turn lowers the risk for school violence.3 These approaches teach educators effective ways to manage a classroom, resolve conflicts nonviolently, promote positive relationships between students with diverse backgrounds, and create positive student-teacher relationships so that students feel comfortable talking with teachers about violence-related issues.*** sudden changes in sleep habits visible prolonged sadness substance use or abuse seeing or hearing things that are not there comments or writings that suggest a desire to harm himself or others thinks others are plotting against him