gang activities, stealing, weapons use, making threats,***But students aren't the only ones experiencing violence in schools. During the 2011-12 school year, more teachers reported being threatened with injury or said they were physically attacked by a student during the previous 12 months. Overall, 9 percent of teachers said they were threatened with injury – lower than the 12 percent who responded similarly in 1993-94, but higher than the 7 percent who said so in 2003-04 and 2007-08. And the 5 percent of teachers who said they had been physically attacked by a student was higher than in any previous survey year, the report found.Today, more schools are controlling access to buildings during school hours as a security measure. In 2003-08, 81.5 percent of schools employed that method, compared with 88.2 percent in 2011-12. Nearly two-thirds of schools also report using security cameras, compared with just under one-third in 2003-04. More than one-quarter of schools also reported having security staff present on campus routinely carrying a firearm."Certain practices, such as locking or monitoring doors or gates, are intended to limit or control access to school campuses, while others, such as the use of metal detectors and security cameras, are intended to monitor or restrict students’ and visitors’ behavior on campus," the report says.[MORE: One Year After Newtown, Adding More Cops Doesn't Prevent School Shootings]The percentage of students who say they have observed certain security measures at their schools has also increased. In 2011, about 77 percent of students between the ages of 12 and 18 said they observed one or more security cameras in the school, compared with about 48 percent in 2003. Nearly two-thirds said they noticed locked entrance or exit doors during the day in 2011, compared with just more than half in 2003. "For parents, school staff, and policymakers to effectively address school crime, they need an accurate understanding of the extent, nature, and context of the problem," the report says. "However, it is difficult to gauge the scope of crime and violence in schools given the large amount of attention devoted to isolated incidents of extreme school violence."***cruel or violent toward pets or other animalswatches many violent television shows and movies or plays a lot of violent games has few friends and is often rejected by other children because of his or her behavior  makes friends with other children known to be unruly or aggressive 