making threats, intimidation, ostracizing, cyber-bullying***But what is perhaps most disturbing is that the increased police presence won't just cause harm to some students — there's no evidence that it will keep any students safer. A recent report by the civil rights organization the Advancement Project notes that most school based attacks are not halted by school resource officers — but instead end with the intervention of school administrators, educators or students.The Advancement Project report further documents that safe schools don't result from merely posting a police officer in the halls. Instead, a truly safe school must create support networks, foster peer relationship building, provide ready access to counseling services and facilitate parental involvement. These are the kind of schools that create positive, affirming environments and use restorative justice and conflict resolution to resolve disputes that will inevitably occur.In schools that have this sort of environment, administrators and yes, law enforcement, are able to use their relationships to anticipate and diffuse potential acts of violence. Demonstrating each day the value and worth of each student and creating a school-based, community-built on a culture of trust and mutual support — these are the most effective weapons we have to protect students from violence in our schools.[Read the U.S. News debate: Should There Be More Armed Guards in Schools?]No school should add another police officer to its ranks without first adopting Advancement Project's recommendations, taking action to evaluate its environment and reforming the ways it falls short of creating a school climate that truly facilitates student safety.Moving forward, the U.S. Department of Justice should only provide school resource officer funding to those school districts that have taken the proactive steps to both create a culture of safety and to ensure that school resource officers receive appropriate training. Organizations like Strategies for Youth train "public safety officers in the science of child and youth development and mental health, and supports communities partnering to promote strong police/youth relationships."These are not the kind of reforms that are sound-bite worthy. They are the kind of reforms that will require a tremendous amount of work and commitment on behalf of the adults that work in our nation's school districts. But they are the only kind reforms that will produce safer schools.Merely adding cops to schools with toxic safety climates will only create more danger for our schoolchildren. And that outcome must be avoided at all costs. Read Patrick Markey on how there is no link between video games and school shootings.Should the federal government pay for armed guards in public schools?Check out U.S. News Weekly, available on iPad*** has inappropriate access to, possession of, and/or use of firearms mood swingsusing drugsrisk takingchange in choice of clothingleather coat