gun owner familya victim of violence and/or abuse Êhas inappropriate access to, possession of, and/or use of firearms ¥¥¥Surveillance is the backbone of the public health approach to youth violence or any other public health problem. It reveals the magnitude of a problem, tracks the magnitude over time, and uses the information gained from such monitoring to help shape actions to prevent or combat the problem.Two approaches to measuring the magnitude of youth violence are commonly used. The first relies on official crime statistics compiled by law enforcement agencies, typically arrest reports. These statistics cannot answer questions about how many young people commit violent crimes or how many violent crimes were committed, but they can answer questions about the number of crimes reported to the police, the volume and types of arrests, and how the volume changes over time.The second approach surveys young people and asks them in confidence about violent acts they have committed or have been victims of during a given period of time. Such reports can be obtained from the same group of people over a long period of time (a longitudinal survey) or from different groups of people at the same point in time (a cross-sectional survey). A prominent example of a repeated cross-sectional survey cited in this chapter is Monitoring the Future, a survey of high school seniors that has been conducted annually since 1975. Reports from young people themselves offer the best way to measure violent behavior that never reaches the attention of the justice system. In fact, evidence in this chapter makes it unmistakably clear that most crimes by young people do not reach the attention of the justice system.Self-reports are well suited to answering such questions as: What proportion of youths are violent? What types of violent acts do they commit? Has the volume of violence changed over time? Are there differences by sex and race/ethnicity? When during development does violence arise, and what forms does it take? How do children's patterns of violence evolve over time, and how long do they last? These questions relate to the magnitude of violent behavior and to its developmental pathways, and they are addressed in this chapter and the next.Both arrest reports and self-reports are reasonably valid and reliable ways of measuring the particular aspects of violence they were designed to measure (for general reviews see Blumstein et al., 1986; Cook & Laub, 1998; Elliott & Huizinga, 1989; Hindelang et al., 1981; Huizinga & Elliott, 1986). Arrests appear to be more objective, but they are not a good general measure of violent behavior, for several reasons. First, the majority of aggravated assaults, robberies, and rapes are never reported to the police; arrests are made in fewer than half of reported crimes (Cook & Laub, 1998; Maguire and Pastore, 1999; Snyder & Sickmund, 1999); and most youths involved in violent crimes are never arrested for a violent crime (Elliott et al., 1989; Loeber et al., 1998; Huizinga et al., 1995). Thus, arrests seriously underestimate the volume of violent crime and fail to distinguish accurately between those who are and are not involved in violence. Second, arrest records do not accurately reflect the distribution of reported violent crimes; that is, the offenses for which youths are arrested are not representative of the crimes reported to police (Cook & Laub, 1998). Nonetheless, arrest records are the best measure of the justice system's response to observed or reported crime.Self-reports were designed specifically to overcome the limitations of violence measures based on official records of criminal behavior. They provide a more direct measure of criminal behavior, but they too have their limitations. Youths may fail to report their violent behavior accurately, either deliberately or because of memory problems, and they may exaggerate their involvement, reporting rather trivial events in response to questions about serious forms of violence. Research reveals that exaggeration (overreporting) is a greater problem than underreporting for reports that cover the previous year (Elliott & Huizinga, 1989), but sophisticated self-report measures can minimize these potential sources of error (Elliott & Huizinga, 1989; Huizinga & Elliott, 1986). The advantages of self-reports are that they capture not only unreported offenses but also details not found in arrest records. In addition, this measure of violent offending is not subject to any of the biases that might be involved in arrest processes.1 The general conclusion from studies evaluating the validity and reliability of self-reports is that they compare favorably with other standard, accepted social science indicators (Hindelang et al., 1981).Both types of measures contribute to our understanding of violence. The key to using them is to understand their relative strengths and limitations, determine where they reinforce each other and where they diverge or conflict, and then interpret the differences in findings, if possible (Brener et al., 1995; Hindelang et al., 1981; Huizinga & Elliott, 1986; Snyder & Sickmund, 1999).Go to:The Violence EpidemicArrest rates of young people for homicide and other violent crimes skyrocketed from 1983 to 1993. In response to the dramatic increase in the number of murders committed by young people, Congress and many state legislatures passed new gun control laws, established boot camps, and began waiving children as young as 10 out of the juvenile justice system and into adult criminal courts. Then, starting in the mid-1990s, overall arrest rates began to decline, returning by 1999 to rates only slightly higher than those in 1983.Several important indicators were used to track youth violence during these years, but their findings did not always agree. Arrest rates, as noted above, provide strong evidence of both a violence epidemic between 1983 and 1993/1994 and a subsequent decline to 1999. Several other indicators of violence furnish similar, but not as robust evidence of a violence epidemic that later subsided. However, the decline in arrest rates is not uniform for all types of violent crime. Moreover, another key indicator -- the volume of violent behavior, which is based on self-reports -- does not show a decline in youth violence after 1993. As explained later, that indicator remained high and essentially level from 1993 to 1998. This chapter answers the questions raised by these disparate findings -- namely, whether the epidemic of violence is really over and why leading indicators of youth violence do not agree.A rise and subsequent decline in the use of firearms and other weapons by young people provides one potential explanation for the different trends in arrest records and self-reports. The violence epidemic was accompanied by an increase in weapons carrying and use. During this era, instant access to weapons, especially firearms, often turned an angry encounter into a seriously violent or lethal one, which, in turn, drew attention from the police in the form of an arrest. As weapons carrying declined, so too did arrest rates, perhaps because the violence was less injurious or lethal. But the amount of underlying violent behavior (on the basis of self-reports) did not change much -- if anything, it appears to have increased in recent years. That undercurrent of violent behavior could reignite into a new epidemic if weapons carrying rises again. From a public health perspective, a resurgence of weapons carrying -- and hence the potential for another epidemic of violence -- poses a grave threat.Go to:Arrests for Violent CrimesThe Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) monitors arrests made by law enforcement agencies across the United States through the Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) program. Since the 1930s, this program has compiled annual arrest information submitted voluntarily by thousands of city, county, and state police agencies. This information currently comes from police jurisdictions that represent only 68 percent of the population, so FBI figures represent projections of these data to the entire U.S. population (Snyder & Sickmund, 1999).The UCR tabulates the number, rate, and certain features of arrests made by law enforcement agencies. Because some people are arrested more than once a year, the UCR cannot provide an accurate count of the number of people arrested or the proportion of the total population arrested (the prevalence). Nor can the UCR provide an accurate count of the number of crimes committed. A single arrest may account for a series of crimes, or a single crime may involve the arrest of more than one person. Young people tend to commit crimes in groups, so the number of youths arrested inflates the number of crimes committed (Snyder & Sickmund, 1999). As noted earlier, arrest rates are also prone to certain types of error. Unless indicated otherwise, the figures on arrests were assembled by the FBI.Arrest Rates and TrendsAs shown in Figure 2-1, overall arrest rates for violent crimes by youths between the ages of 10 and 17 rose sharply from 1983 to 1993/1994. Rates then declined until 1999, the most recent year for which figures are available.http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK44300/figure/A13346/?report=objectonlyFigureFigure 2-1. Arrest rates of youths age 10-17 for serious violent crime, 1980-1999. Sources: Snyder, (unpublished).Figure 2-2 shows arrest rates for each of the four violent crimes considered in this report. In 1999, arrests of young people for all crimes totaled 2.4 million (Snyder, (unpublished)), with 104,000 arrests for violent crimes. Arrests for aggravated assault (69,600) and robbery (28,000) were the most frequent, with arrests for forcible rape (5,000) and murder (1,400) trailing significantly behind. In 1998, youths accounted for one out of six arrests for all violent crimes, a share that has decreased slightly (16 percent) in recent years (Snyder, (unpublished)). Although the 1999 arrest rate for violent crimes was the lowest in this decade, it is still 15 percent higher than the 1983 rate (Snyder, (unpublished)). As seen in Figure 2-2, the 1999 rates for homicide, robbery, and rape are below the 1983 rates; however, arrests for aggravated assault are still nearly 70 percent higher ***socially withdrawnbreak up with girlfriendsingle parent familyfamily income under $30,000.grades fallingfailing schoolbulliedgun owner family