 vandalism, gang activities, stealing, weapons use***Coping With StressRecommend on FacebookTweettarget anchor for return to top feature in VP1bodyEveryone—adults, teens, and even children—experiences stress at times. Stress can be beneficial by helping people develop the skills they need to cope with and adapt to new and potentially threatening situations throughout life. However, the beneficial aspects of stress diminish when it is severe enough to overwhelm a person's ability to take care of themselves and family. Using healthy ways to cope and getting the right care and support can put problems in perspective and help stressful feelings and symptoms subside.Stress is a condition that is often characterized by symptoms of physical or emotional tension. It is a reaction to a situation where a person feels threatened or anxious. Stress can be positive (e.g., preparing for a wedding) or negative (e.g., dealing with a natural disaster).Sometimes after experiencing a traumatic event that is especially frightening—including personal or environmental disasters, or being threatened with an assault—people have a strong and lingering stress reaction to the event. Strong emotions, jitters, sadness, or depression may all be part of this normal and temporary reaction to the stress of an overwhelming event.Common reactions to a stressful event can include:• Disbelief, shock, and numbness• Feeling sad, frustrated, and helpless• Fear and anxiety about the future• Feeling guilty• Anger, tension, and irritability• Difficulty concentrating and making decisions• Crying• Reduced interest in usual activities• Wanting to be alone• Loss of appetite• Sleeping too much or too little• Nightmares or bad memories• Reoccurring thoughts of the event• Headaches, back pains, and stomach problems• Increased heart rate, difficulty breathing• Smoking or use of alcohol or drugsHealthy Ways to Cope with StressFeeling emotional and nervous or having trouble sleeping and eating can all be normal reactions to stress. Engaging in healthy activities and getting the right care and support can put problems in perspective and help stressful feelings subside in a few days or weeks. Some tips for beginning to feel better are:• Take care of yourself.? Eat healthy, well-balanced meals? Exercise on a regular basis? Get plenty of sleep? Give yourself a break if you feel stressed out• Talk to others. Share your problems and how you are feeling and coping with a parent, friend, counselor, doctor, or pastor.• Avoid drugs and alcohol. Drugs and alcohol may seem to help with the stress. In the long run, they create additional problems and increase the stress you are already feeling.• Take a break. If your stress is caused by a national or local event, take breaks from listening to the news stories, which can increase your stress.Recognize when you need more help. If problems continue or you are thinking about suicide, talk to a psychologist, social worker, or professional counselor.If you or someone you know needs immediate help, please contact the one of the following crisis hotlines:• Disaster Distress Helpline: 1-800-985-5990• National Suicide Prevention Lifeline: 1-800-273-TALK (1-888-628-9454 for Spanish-speaking callers)• Youth Mental Health Line: 1-888-568-1112• Child-Help USA: 1-800-422-4453 (24 hour toll free) Coping With StressAdditional Information about Coping• Coping with Stress After a Traumatic Event[PDF 867KB]• SAMHSA Disaster Distress• American Psychological AssociationHelping Youth Cope with StressBecause of their level of development, children and adolescents often struggle with how to cope well with stress. Youth can be particularly overwhelmed when their stress is connected to a traumatic event—like a natural disaster (earthquakes, tornados, wildfires), family loss, school shootings, or community violence. Parents and educators can take steps to provide stability and support that help young people feel better.TipsTips for ParentsIt is natural for children to worry, especially when scary or stressful events happen in their lives. Talking with children about these stressful events and monitoring what children watch or hear about the events can help put frightening information into a more balanced context. Some suggestions to help children cope are:• Maintain a normal routine. Helping children wake up, go to sleep, and eat meals at regular times provide them a sense of stability. Going to school and participating in typical after-school activities also provide stability and extra support.• Talk, listen, and encourage expression. Create opportunities to have your children talk, but do not force them. Listen to your child’s thoughts and feelings and share some of yours. After a traumatic event, it is important for children to feel like they can share their feelings and to know that their fears and worries are understandable. Keep these conversations going by asking them how they feel in a week, then in a month, and so on.• Watch and listen. Be alert for any change in behavior. Are children sleeping more or less? Are they withdrawing from friends or family? Are they behaving in any way out of the ordinary? Any changes in behavior, even small changes, may be signs that the child is having trouble coming to terms with the event and may support.• Reassure. Stressful events can challenge a child's sense of physical and emotional safety and security. Take opportunities to reassure your child about his or her safety and well-being and discuss ways that you, the school, and the community are taking steps to keep them safe.Connect with others. Make an on-going effort to talk to other parents and your child’s teachers about concerns and ways to help your child cope. You do not have to deal with problems alone-it is often helpful for parents, schools, and health professionals to work together to support and ensuring the well-being of all children in stressful times.***(socially withdrawntrouble paying attention and concentrating using drugsloss of appetitevisible prolonged sadnesssudden changes in weightexcessive worry about weight gainsudden changes in sleep habitssubstance use or abuse