stealing, weapons use, making threats, intimidation, ostracizing, cyber-bullying.***Adolescent violence is partly attributable to escalating sequences of events that culminate in outcomes unintended by the participants. Although the young people who engage in violence do not intend the outcome, they nevertheless suffer the consequences—either the harm that comes from being victimized or the punishment that comes from being the aggressor. This type of violence is extensive. An estimated 16 percent of all high school students in this country have been in one or more physical fights on school property in the course of a year.1 Victimization rates for simple assault are highest among young people ages 12 to 19.2 The problem is in-creasing, because while some types of violent crime are declining, the risk of being a victim of this type of crime has risen since the mid-1980s among juve-niles ages 12 to 17. The same is true with the more serious offense of aggravated as-sault; juvenile arrests for this offense are projected to rise.3Aggravated assault and even homicide, which include young people as victims and offenders, often result from events similar to those triggering less serious offenses—transactions over seemingly trivial matters, occurring between peoplewho know each other. This study of vio-lent incidents among middle and high school students focused not only on the types and frequency of these incidents but also on their dynamics—the locations, the “opening moves,” the relationship be-tween disputants, the goals and justifica-tions of the aggressor, the role of third parties, and other factors.The violent incidents were analyzed to create general models of the sequence or pattern of events in the interactions among disputants. The analysis confirmed that the opening moves involved such actions as minor slights and teasing, and the inci-dents took place largely among young people who knew each other. What is perhaps most troubling is the finding that the students’ violent behavior did not stem from lack of values. Rather, it was grounded in a well-developed set of val-ues that holds such behavior to be a justi-fiable, commonsense way to achieve certain goals.Information about the typical steps that culminate in violent incidents, the ration-ales for those incidents, the most common locations where the incidents take place, and how the disputants and others are re-***disrupts classroom activities does poorly in school frequently gets into fights with other children at school (uncontrollable anger, impulsive and chronic hitting, intimidating and bullying behavior) reacts to disappointments, criticism, or teasing with extreme and intense anger, blame, or revenge watches many violent television shows and movies or plays a lot of violent games has few friends and is often rejected by other children because of his or her behavior  makes friends with other children known to be unruly or aggressive 