weapons use, making threats, intimidation

***

Warning Signs of Youth Violence
***
Retrospective analyses reveal a number of warning signs of violence that were dismissed in each incident of serious violence. How can parents and teachers help to prevent future violence?  Pay Attention to the Following Warning Signs:
1. Difficulty Controlling Anger
Children and adolescents at risk for engaging in violence tend to have a history of tantrums and uncontrollable angry outbursts. When frustrated, they often resort to name calling, cursing or abusive language.
2. Peer Rejection and Difficulty in Peer Relations
At-risk youth are often rejected or on the fringe of the peer group with few or no close friends. Many youth who commit violence have a history of being bullied or engaging in bullying.
3. Discipline Problems, Delinquent Activity, and Carrying a Weapon
Young people at risk for violence are often involved in antisocial activity such as frequent fighting and property damage. Needless to say, carrying a weapon is one of the best predictors of violence.
4. Unusual Interest or Preoccupation with Weapons, Explosives, and Entertainment Depicting violence
A consistent preference for television shows, movies, reading materials, music, and other media that portray violent themes and acts suggests that the young person may have become desensitized to, and thus at-risk for, violence.
5. Displays Cruelty to Animals
The torture of animals is often a precursor to that of people.
6. School Essays, Projects, and Other Creative Work Reflect Anger, Frustration, and Desires for Violence
Many students reveal their turmoil through creative projects. Creative work that displays disturbing themes of violence or death must be recognized as a call for help. Classmates and teachers must take these messages seriously.
7. Depression and/or has Significant Mood Swings
Students at risk for violence often feel that they have nothing to lose. Violence is often precipitated by withdrawal from others, perceptions of hopelessness, and suicide threats and attempts.
8. Significant Changes in Behavior and Appearance
A sudden withdrawal from friends and usual activities, an increase in drug or alcohol use, or an increase in other risk taking behaviors is a sign that a child or teen is experiencing turmoil.
9. Threats or Detailed Plans to Commit Acts of Violence
Parents and teachers must instruct youth to consider all threats made by classmates as potentially serious. In nearly all cases of school violence to date, such threats were dismissed by youth.
Violence itself is difficult to predict; however, each of these signs indicate a child or adolescent who is experiencing difficulties. Therefore, displaying one or two of the warning signs may not place a child or adolescent at risk for engaging in violence, but signifies a need for additional assistance from mental health professionals. Young people who display any of the above warning signs should be referred to the school counselor or psychologist for further assessment.

***

excessive fear, worrying, or crying

loss of appetite

sudden changes in weight

excessive worry about weight gain

sudden changes in sleep habits

visible prolonged sadness

has a history of violent and aggressive behavior 
makes suicidal comments or attempts 

makes serious threats of violence (detailed and direct) 

self-harm behaviors (cutting, scratching, burning, hitting, etc.) 

shows intolerance for differences and prejudicial attitudes