sexual harassment, vandalism

***


Warning Signs of School Violence
***
ERIC Review Kevin Dwyer, David Osher, and Cynthia Warger 
Spring 2000

Early Warning Signs
It is not always possible to predict behavior that will lead to violence. However, educators and parents and sometimes students can recognize certain early warning signs. In some situations and for some youth, different combinations of events, behaviors, and emotions may lead to aggressive rage or violent behavior toward themselves or others. A good rule of thumb is to assume that these warning signs, especially when they are presented in combination, indicate a need for further analysis to determine an appropriate intervention.
Most children who become violent toward themselves or others feel rejected and psychologically victimized. In most cases, children exhibit aggressive behavior early in life and, if not provided support, will continue a progressive developmental pattern toward severe aggression or violence. However, when children have a positive, meaningful connection to an adult whether it be at home, in school, or in the community the potential for violence is reduced significantly.
None of these signs alone is sufficient for predicting aggression and violence. Moreover, it is inappropriate and potentially harmful to use the early warning signs as a checklist against which to measure individual children. Rather, the early warning signs are offered only as an aid in identifying and referring children who may need help. School communities must ensure that staff and students use the early warning signs only for identification and referral purposes only trained professionals should make diagnoses in consultation with the child's parents or guardian.
The following early warning signs are presented with the qualifications that they are not equally significant and are not presented in order of seriousness:
Social withdrawal
Excessive feelings of isolation and being alone
Excessive feelings of rejection
Being a victim of violence
Feelings of being persecuted
Low school interest and poor academic performance
Expression of violence in writings and drawings
Uncontrolled anger
Patterns of impulsive and chronic hitting, intimidating, and bullying behaviors
History of discipline problems
History of violent and aggressive behavior
Intolerance for differences and prejudicial attitudes
Use of drugs and alcohol
Affiliation with gangs
Inappropriate access to firearms
Serious threats of violence
Imminent Warning Signs
Unlike early warning signs, imminent warning signs indicate that a student is very close to behaving in a way that is potentially dangerous to himself or herself or others. Imminent warning signs require an immediate response.
No single warning sign can predict that a dangerous act will occur. Rather, imminent warning signs usually are presented as a sequence of overt, serious, hostile behaviors or threats directed at peers, staff, or other individuals. Usually, imminent warning signs are evident to more than one staff member as well as to the child's family. When warning signs indicate that danger is imminent, safety must always be the first and foremost consideration. Action must be taken immediately. Imminent warning signs may include

Serious physical fighting with peers or family members.
Severe destruction of property.
Severe rage for seemingly minor reasons.
Other self-injurious behaviors or threats of suicide.
Threats of lethal violence.
A detailed plan (time, place, and method) to harm or kill others, particularly if the child has a history of aggression or has attempted to carry out threats in the past.
Possession and/or use of firearms and other weapons.
Immediate intervention by school authorities and possibly law enforcement officers is needed when a child has a detailed plan to commit violence or is carrying a weapon. Parents should be informed immediately when students exhibit any threatening behavior. School communities also have the responsibility to seek assistance from child and family services providers, community mental health agencies, and other appropriate organizations. These responses should reflect school board policies and be consistent with violence prevention and response plans.

***

frequently gets into fights with other children at school (uncontrollable anger, 
impulsive and chronic hitting, intimidating and bullying behavior) 

reacts to disappointments, criticism, or teasing with extreme and intense anger, 
blame, or revenge 

watches many violent television shows and movies or plays a lot of violent games 

has few friends and is often rejected by other children because of his or her behavior 
 
makes friends with other children known to be unruly or aggressive 

consistently does not listen to adults 

not sensitive to the feelings of others 

cruel or violent toward pets or other animals 

easily frustrated 