weapons use, making threats, intimidation***To the media, the cause and effect of school violence is a self-explanatory negative that we should all aim to avoid. However, the fact of the matter is things are never that simple. There is much more to school violence than initially meets the eye. There isn't one factor that causes school violence (not music, bullying, or anything else), and there is not a clear effect that results from violence. Keep reading for more information on this controversial and emotional issue.	What Defines School ViolenceWe've all seen school violence on television news broadcasts; large tragedies like Columbine are quite difficult to forget. However, while that is one end of the spectrum of school violence, there is a whole other end to it. In fact, school violence can encompass bullying and seemingly insignificant behaviors that add up to teens feeling unsafe at school. School violence is a dangerous issue because it can be quite difficult to highlight exactly what causes it.Ideas on the Cause and Effect of School ViolenceMany experts, parents, and critics have tried to explain the cause and effect of school violence. Many have tried to blame violent video games that children play, music with suggestive and sensitive lyrics, and movies desensitizing children to violence. However, many critics of this perspective suggest that it is not the games but the effect of having a parent that never talked about the content of these media sources that can affect teens.Another popular theory on what causes school violence is intolerance. In a world with so many different perspectives coming together, like different races, different sexual orientations and different nationalities, it can be difficult to feel like you fit in. It can be harder to find your place if everyone around you makes fun of you for the qualities which make you different. The intolerance that many face may contribute to school violence. Critics of this idea highlight that every teen faces intolerance on some level and that teens who "break" must be experiencing something different.https://googleads.g.doubleclick.net/aclk?sa=l&ai=CU4DPf8riV4LCBML9iQPIkLOwBYObnN1Gy-fJrt4Dv-EeEAEghPj1AWDJhriN9KTQGaAB9ZqzoQPIAQKoAwHIA8EEqgSkAU_QAsyRMmGdK7lQ0oZkpzTKTD1W564kOD-uqw4IQzAEofrHRkwMefLjK5wk6IJ77A4W8JAELl29_glr7Aa4QiROUrzz-58hIkq99TOtBwqyBqBa2orFOm-JdMHPzYTYj7O_4B4X-pieOn9ISTqmfKn2SefzaP2MwyFvkfbThEtNI_qpdPUbhLSq9Dc_RxR5FpCk56zM-Oi9fXKj1T33osctFZfDoAYCgAfz5MxeqAeBxhuoB6a-G9gHAdIIBQiAYRAB&num=1&sig=AOD64_37FPblROt5t3eABs55QPCAdLUW2w&client=ca-pub-3619764495662405&adurl=http://wellnessme.net/%3FadAnother theory is that since the early 1990s, access to weapons and illicit substances has increased. As a result, teens try to emulate many of the more violent experiences they hear about in the media. This is also related to increased access to things like drugs, alcohol, and cigarettes. Today's teens are exposed to these experiences in an entirely different way versus previous generations. Critics of this perspective highlight how prior generations did not have the same taboo of topics like smoking and would often become involved in these behaviors at an early age. To these critics, little has changed over the years.Effects of School ViolenceWhile it is easy to speculate about what the primary causes of school violence are, the effects of school violence are rather simple to see. One of the most damaging effects is the frequency of school shootings across America. Unfortunately, another visible effect is the loss of lives as a result of school violence.Another effect of school violence is the shift that it brings to the educational process. Teachers are forced to be on the lookout for troubled students, rather than focusing on teaching alone. This heightened attention to school safety is unfortunately necessary, but it indicates a shifting perspective in American viewpoints of school. In some schools, teens may not be able to get as much of an education because educators need to be focused on keeping teens safe.Another obvious effect of school violence is that many students end up feeling fearful of other students or of going to school. When dealing with school bullies, teens teasing one another, and past violent incidents, teens begin to fear what will happen to them everyday. Some parents react swiftly to these type of fears and look into homeschooling their own children.Prevention Is KeyNo one will ever know the exact reason as to what causes more extreme cases of school violence. However, no matter the expert, one thing everyone can agree on is that violence in schools need to stop. Rather than focusing on what is behind violence in schools or what can happen as a result of it, we need to become focused on preventing school violence.***consistently does not listen to adults not sensitive to the feelings of others using drugs